<doc date=Tuesday, January 29, 2019>
18 months.
In some ways it seems like an eternity, and in other ways it seems like just yesterday that I said my final good-bye to my mom.
Life has completely changed without my mom here.
I would be lying if I said that things weren't all around easier without the chaos of coordinating caregiving schedules and hurrying over in the mornings to bathe Mom and worrying about her throughout the day, worrying about the future.
But I still miss her.
I miss being able to touch her, hug her, tell her things; even if she didn't understand what I was saying, there was still some sort of comfort in talking to her.
They say that time heals.
I don't believe that's true.
The hole is never filled; we simply learn how to maneuver around it.
The hardest part about the passage of time is when people expect that you will heal; that you will some how "get over it".
The world moves on and slowly forgets the person you've loved so dearly and lost, but you never do.
You remember.
I remember.
I remember laying across her lap while she scratched my back.
I remember the way her face would light up when she talked about her grandkids.
I remember the smell of her hair and the scent of her lotion.
I remember the way she would play with her hair and tuck it behind her ear when she was nervous.
I remember the freckle in her eye and her front tooth that was slightly crooked that she was always self-conscious about, but that we loved because it was a characteristic of her.
I remember laying on her bed at night, chatting with her about whatever was on my mind (until my dad would come and kick me out of the room).
I remember my mentor, my cheerleader, my mother, my friend.
I remember all of her.
But I'm also afraid of forgetting.
If I live to be an old lady, I will have lived more than half my life without her.
How can that be when she is such a big part of my life?
Will she slowly start to fade away?
There are no new memories being made.
There are no new pictures to share.
And I worry that I will forget.
I worry that my children will forget.
I am afraid of losing this part of who I am as the time passes and as everyone else around me moves on, and forgets.
Not a day goes by that I don't think of her.
Not a day goes by that I don't miss her.
Not one single day.
There will always be a void.
And so, I cling to the memories I have of her.
I continue to talk about her to my kids.
I imagine that she is there, cheering them on, cheering me on.
And I hope beyond hope that I will see her again one day.
What a glorious reunion that will be.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 29, 2018>
One year.
How can time seem fast and slow at the same time?
We have been through our firsts of everything without mom: the first holiday season, the first birthday, the first Mother's Day.
And now, the first anniversary of the day she left us.
They say that it gets easier with time.
If that's true, then why does it still hurt so much?
Why have I spent the entire day (and the days building up to today) feeling so down and in tears?
I knew it would be hard.
I tried to give myself a distraction.
Several months ago, we planned a family vacation for the last two weeks of July.
It seemed like a good idea at the time-to get away, having family fun so that our minds don't wander back to that dark time.
It helped a little, but I'm really not sure if it was a good idea or not.
It did help to keep my mind busy throughout the day, but I also felt a dark cloud lingering over me the whole time.
Every morning I woke up remembering what we were doing on that day one year ago; it's impossible to forget.
The memories of those last two weeks replay vividly in my mind, the good and the bad; memories of hospice stepping in, of the doctor delivering painful news, memories of taking her for rides around the block in the wheelchair when she could no longer walk, memories of her looking up at me and touching my face, memories of snuggling in bed beside her warm body as she slowly slipped away.
I tried to push them out of my mind, but at the same time I want to remember, I want to hold on to those last moments that I had with my mom.
I don't want to forget her.
And so the memories creep in, haunting me, leaving a deep ache in my chest.
We returned from our vacation last night.
We wanted to be home to visit her grave on this day.
I wanted to plan something special, something meaningful, for the one year mark.
But, I couldn't think of what to do and it was just too depressing to think about, if I'm being honest.
It isn't exactly a celebration; this is the day she died.
Yet, we couldn't let the day go by without acknowledging her.
We ended up keeping it simple: a visit to her grave followed by dinner at my house with a small group of family.
We had a meal that reminded us of her.
Mom's spaghetti dinner has always been a favorite, so I made her delicious spaghetti sauce.
Some of my early readers may remember Mom's obsession (in earlier phases) with tortellini and mixed vegetables, so Dad brought that, although we didn't use quite as much garlic as she used to.
Dad also brought the root beer and we drank with straws, just how she liked.
She went through a phase of salad obsession, so Aunt Sharon brought some salad.
Of course, the meal would not be complete without pb&j; sandwiches, so my sister-in-law, Amber, brought those.
For dessert, I whipped up a batch of Mom's chocolate chip cookies, taking me back to the good ol' days when I'd walk in the door after school and inhale the sweet scent of homemade cookies awaiting me for snack.
It was sweet to share a meal together-a meal Mom would have been quite pleased with-as we remembered her.
By this afternoon all I really wanted to do was cancel dinner and stay curled up in my bed by myself, but I'm glad that I didn't.
It helps to be surrounded by family.
I made it through the day, and I even blogged about it.
I think that's a victory.
My head hurts from crying and I want to go to sleep now.
Sorry to sound like a Negative Nelly, but that's just keeping it real.
The pain doesn't go away, even with time.
You just learn how to live with it, little by little.
There are good days and bad days.
Some days I feel strong, some days I feel weaker than ever.
This is so much harder than I ever imagined. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, May 16, 2018>
It's been a while since I've last written.
Life is moving forward.
The seasons are changing, the kids are growing.
It's strange to be in a time and place where my mom does not exist.
Sometimes I watch the news or hop onto social media and I think about how lucky she was to never have to see some of the ugliness and craziness going on in the world.
If everything I've been taught is true, then she's in a glorious place where sorrow and ugly doesn't exist.
Other times I am left feeling sorry that she never got to grow old; she never got to watch her grandkids grow, and see all that they are accomplishing.
She missed out on the golden years with my dad.
There's an emptiness in our lives without her.
Sometimes I wonder what life would be like if Mom were still here.
Who would I be?
What would I be doing?
I sometimes find myself imagining what I'd be doing right now if Mom were still with us.
I imagine the two of us making our shopping list for our upcoming RV trip to Lake Pleasant.
I imagine sitting together in church, my youngest sitting on her lap while she looks at books with him and tries to keep him quiet and reverent.
I imagine her marveling at Ryder's most recent tooth that he lost and remarking what a big boy he is becoming.
I imagine that I'd be saving a seat for her at the boy's talent show.
I would look over at her and she would have that huge grin that she used to get when she was beaming with pride.
She would be so proud of their courage for getting up on stage, and of Cody's amazing talent with his guitar.
I imagine her cheering above every other voice in the room, "that's my girl!"
when Aubrey takes the stage to sing, just like she did when it was one of her daughter's on stage.
I imagine my kids having sleepovers at grandma's house while Jeff and I go out on a date night.
She and dad would probably be spoiling them with trips to the movies or the fair, like they used to do B.D.
I imagine myself, picking up the phone to call her and vent to her about the teenage attitude I'm dealing with, or to ask for recipe tips or advice on any given topic.
If Mom were still here, I wonder how I would fill my days now that all the kids are in school.
I imagine that I would be the mom that is at the school all the time, volunteering in the classroom, joining the PTA, running all the activities.
Maybe I would put more time and effort in to my home sewing business.
I wouldn't have so many distractions- a foundation to run, blogs to write, tears to wipe.
My course in life has certainly been changed by dementia and by the tragic loss of my mom.
It has changed the person that I am.
The ambitions and goals of my younger self are not the same as they are today and life can never be how it would have been if Mom were here.
Now that she is gone, I can't go back to who I once was.
And yet, I'm not sure if I'd want to go back to that person.
On one hand, I have much more sadness in my life now.
The rose colored glasses have come off and I see things in a different light now; not just my own sorrows and struggles, but that of others as well.
My heart hurts for what I've been through and it hurts for what I see others going through.
There are some days where I feel completely unhinged and unstable and I struggle with the dark cloud of sadness that often hovers overhead.
But, on the other hand, I've heard it said that you can't truly feel joy without having felt pain, and I feel like I appreciate the little things in life so much more.
Going through this has definitely made me a more empathetic person.
I feel that I am better able to relate to others experiencing loss because I have felt what it's like to have my own heart ripped in two.
I am more aware of other's needs and things I might be able to do to lighten their burden.
B.D.
(Before Dementia), I would have never imagined myself doing some of the things I've had to do; giving up my time to provide care for someone other than my kids, changing diapers, aiding and comforting someone in their last moments in life, preparing them with all the love and tenderness that one can muster for their final departure of this life.
All of those things required sacrifice and they were not always easy or convenient, but I am better off for having learned those little lessons of love.
Love means sacrifice and I'm not so sure I completely understood that B.D.
My relationships with family members and friends would not be the same either.
My dad and I have always had a good relationship, but I feel as though we have grown a lot closer over the past several years.
We have leaned on one another to get through this.
We've had some deep and meaningful conversations and I have found myself turning to him for advice many times.
My love and respect for him has only grown deeper by his example of unconditional love and care for my mom and for his entire family.
I have always considered myself to have had good relationships with my family, but when my mom got sick, there were a couple of aunts who became like second mothers to me.
After my mom was diagnosed, one of my aunts (who lives long distance) started calling me every now and then, just to chit-chat.
We'd never really had that kind of relationship before, but the more and more she called, the more I came to see that I had someone else there for me, ready to listen.
Now, we talk on the phone at least a couple of times a week, if not more.
She's become a mother figure to me and our relationship has become very special and dear to me.
I have another aunt who I've grown closer with as well.
She was the aunt I used to spend the night with growing up, so we've always been close.
But since my mom has been sick, we make more of an effort to have regular family dinners and get together here and there "just because" or to celebrate birthdays.
She and my uncle make an effort to be at the kid's concerts and events and I know that both of these aunts are always be there for me in a heartbeat when I need anything.
In fact, they are the ones who I leaned on the most the week my mom died.
I don't know that these relationships would be quite the same if dementia hadn't have crossed our path.
Because of dementia, I have had to learn patience and forgiveness, both for myself and with others (this is a never ending lesson!).
I have learned to rely on and trust in other people.
My mom was always my "go to" person, but by opening myself to talking and confiding with other people, my relationships with them have grown stronger and I have discovered a whole "community" of people that I feel a part of.
So many people have shown love and support over the years; family and friends alike rallied together to help our family during years of hardship.
I had friends who had never even met my mom B.D., but were still at her funeral and serving us through our darkest times.
Their examples of friendship have truly inspired me and makes me want to be a better friend and person.
I hate that it took losing my mom to grow into the person I have become, yet there is also a sense of beauty in bettering one self in spite of trials.
I can't really say if I am truly better or not, since I don't know the person I would be if this had never happened, but I'd like to think that there are ways that I've learned and grown through this.
Lately I have been struggling with myself; feelings of sadness and inadequacy have been creeping in; feeling a bit lost and confused about which path to take in this stage of my earthly journey (another post for another day).
Sometimes I wish I could turn back time and go back to a simpler time of life.
But I am trying to focus on the beauty rather than the pain and trying to live a life that my mom would be proud of.  
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 16, 2018>
It's been a while since my last post.
Partly because the holidays are always a really busy time, but also because the holidays were really hard this year.
I didn't figure anyone wanted to read another depressing post about how much I was missing my mom.
I actually sat down and tried to write a happier post, but I just wasn't feeling it.
Everyone said the first holidays without your loved one are rough.
I guess I didn't anticipate it would be so hard because we had started losing my mom a long time ago.
She hadn't known what Christmas was for a few years.
Yet, it was different and it was painful not having her there with us physically.
No gifts to put under the tree.
No hugs to give.
No pictures to take.
All we could do was visit her grave; a piece of stone with her name and picture on it.
We did, as a family, go over and decorate her grave.
I'd like to think she was looking in on us and saw the love we have for her.
We visited our other loved ones who are buried at that same cemetery as well: my grandparents, great-grandparents and nephew.
I decided a while ago that I would continue with making English Toffee this Christmas, in honor of Mom.
As you may remember, I have been making my mom's famous English Toffee for Christmas and Mother's Day for the past few years to raise money for my mom's caregiving fund.
Obviously that need is gone, but I have some devoted customers who look forward to toffee season and I figured it would be a nice way to honor and remember her at the holidays.
I decided to make a donation to The DEANA Foundation with the money raised this year.
I didn't think it would be a difficult task; I've been doing this for years and have enjoyed doing it for my mom.
The difference that I didn't anticipate was that I am no longer doing this for my mom, but rather in memory of.
It hit me much harder than I expected.
On day one of making toffee, I ended up crying on my kitchen floor, two separate times.
I always thought it was over-dramatic in the movies when people would crunch up in a ball and cry; I've never been that kind of crier.
I get it now.
Thankfully, I was able to pull myself out of it and finish the job.
It helped to have my aunt and sister-in-law come over a time or two to help me out so I wasn't alone with my thoughts.
I got through toffee season and I made around 90 pounds of toffee!
On Christmas morning, I woke up with the flu.
I didn't know it was the flu at first.
It started with a slight cough that hurt my chest, and throughout the day I felt progressively worse.
I started getting body aches, fever and chills and I just felt tired.
It wasn't exactly how I wanted to spend my Christmas, but if I'm being completely honest it did distract me from missing my mom because all I could think about was getting through the day and going to bed at the end of it.
Having family around also helped to make the day brighter.
I know my dad struggled a lot this season.
I can only imagine what he's going through.
I know how hard it has been for me and hard as that is, I have no doubt that it's ten times harder for him.
But, we got through it and are looking forward to brighter days.
Just after the new year, dad and I visited Mom's grave (as we do every Sunday) and we talked about the struggles of moving forward and feeling joy after losing her.
My dad said something that really made me pause and think.
To preface this, he remarked how he'd been watching "Castaway" a lot lately.
At the end of the movie, Chuck talks about how he survived for four years, alone on that island.
My dad quoted a part of the movie; here is the quote directly from Chuck's mouth: "I knew, somehow, that I had to stay alive.
Somehow.
I had to keep breathing.
Even though there was no reason to hope.
And all my logic said that I would never see this place again.
So that's what I did.
I stayed alive.
I kept breathing.
And one day my logic was proven all wrong because the tide came in, and gave me a sail.
And now, here I am.
I'm back.
In Memphis, talking to you.
I have ice in my glass... And I've lost her all over again.
I'm so sad that I don't have Kelly.
But I'm so grateful that she was with me on that island.
And I know what I have to do now.
I gotta keep breathing.
Because tomorrow the sun will rise.
Who knows what the tide could bring?"
My dad has lost my mom and some days it feels that all hope is lost with her.
Yet, no matter what, the sun is going to continue to rise each day, whether we want it to or not.
It is up to us to decide how we want each day to be.
Some days will be easier than others, but who knows what tomorrow might bring?
Even through the sorrow, we can find joy.
It may only be a moment here and there, but hopefully the joy will soon outweigh the pain.
In thinking about this new year, I've thought a lot about how I can find my joy again.
The ache in my heart for my mom will never go away, but I am trying my best to live each day focusing on the good things that I have in my life.
Will I stop crying for her?
No, I don't believe I ever will.
But I am resolved to do my best to focus on the things that bring me joy.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 16, 2017>
Last Sunday was our 3rd annual Purple Boat Float.
If you've missed my posts about it in years past, it is a beautiful event put on by the Commission of Aging here in Riverside.
People come together and sign/dedicate a boat to their loved one who has been affected by dementia.
At dusk, we take the boats out into the lake and light tea light candle in them, launching them out into the water.
It is a very sweet evening.
It started after a group of us came together to start the Purple City Alliance, which helps bring awareness and training about how to deal with dementia to businesses, making our city a dementia friendly city.
I only attended the first few meetings (mom's care had become too involved to continue the meetings), but it is a great thing that our city is doing!
The woman who started the Purple Boat Float actually sits on The DEANA Foundation's board now!
:)  This year, dad was unable to make it to the boat float.
My Aunt (his sister) was throwing a surprise 60th birthday party for her husband in Northern California, so my dad and all 5 of his siblings went up there for that event.
I'm glad that he was able to go and have a fun weekend getaway with his siblings; they are a lot of fun when they are together!
But, the boat float wasn't quite the same without him.
I felt a little "off" this time around, I suppose because it was the first boat float where Mom hasn't been alive.
Still, it was a beautiful event.
It has grown considerably since our first year and I have no doubt that it will continue to grow more each year.
As always, I set up a booth for the foundation, giving information to anyone who might need caregiving help.
I'm usually the only person running the show (along with Jeff, of course) but I was lucky to have a friend (and also board member) join me this time.
Something special about this year was having Mom's brother and sister-in-law join us.
My sister, along with Mom's sister (Aunt Claudia) joined us last year, and Uncle Mike and Tia Tina joined us this year.
My hope is to have more and more family members join us each year!
I was a little bit worried going into this boat float that I was going to fall apart.
I had a really rough week last which included two big breakdowns (right when I thought I was getting better!)
I was just recovering from all of those emotions when it was time for the boat float.
Even though I wasn't feeling my absolute best (emotionally), I held it all together and made it through the night.
It was a nice evening and I was so thankful to have family there with me.
I don't think they even understand what that means to me right now, but family support helps me get through the days!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 6, 2017>
Last night, my daughter performed in our city's version of "America's Got Talent".
It was her first competition and the talent for the night was amazing!
Over 70 people auditioned and only 19 of those made it into the actual show; Aubrey was one of them.
I wrote all about it and posted the video of her amazing performance on my other blog (click here), but the other part of my feelings about the night seemed more appropriate to share here.
First of all, I am so grateful for the wonderful family members and friends who came to support her in this big show.
This is the biggest thing she has been a part of and whenever she performs, she always asks who is going to come watch her.
I think it gives her confidence to know that she has her own cheering section of supporters and people who love her.
Watching her on stage was an extremely proud mom moment for me.
She has grown so much over the past year and I'm in awe of this little human that I had a part in creating!
After Aubrey's number, I couldn't help but to think about how proud my mom would have been to see her granddaughter up on stage.
Mom always beamed with pride whenever she watched her own children perform.
I have no doubt that she would have been there with us and would have been so incredibly proud of Aubrey's talent.
So many emotions were stirred last night, and ever since; like the fading fire that has been stirred in the ash.
Many feelings that I have been struggling with have been reignited.
It's hard to put everything I am feeling into words.
One on hand, I feel incredibly proud and joyful of Aubrey's accomplishments.
On the other hand, it has awakened feelings of extreme sadness, hurt and even anger.
Nobody ever said life would be fair.
Still, there are moments when the unfairness of it all gets to me.
I try to be upbeat and positive, but that's not how it is all the time.
I feel like I am such a fragile person right now, that I am going to break at any given moment.
I think I hide it well, but there are some moments that I really struggle.
It breaks my heart that my mom couldn't live to see this.
It breaks my heart that Aubrey didn't have a grandma there to cheer her on; it breaks my heart more than words can say.
There are other heartbreaking thoughts and feelings I have that are probably better left unsaid.
It just plain sucks that my mom was cheated out of this part of her life; that we were all cheated of having her in it.
I have lost more than just my mother.
I've lost my cheerleader, my confidant, the grandmother to my children, my friend.
I miss her more and more every day.
I thought it would get better, but some days it only seems to be worse.
I don't know when or if it will ever get any better.
They say that it gets better with time, but the void will always be there.
It will be there at every birthday party, every recital or show or game, every holiday; graduations and weddings and births.
We will think about her every time, and we will mourn her all over again.
Somehow I have to learn to live with this without falling apart every time.
Forgive me for my negativity.
There are still many things to be grateful for.
The people who showed up last night mean the world to me.
I know my dad would probably rather be watching a football game, yet he comes to watch his grandkids and support them in their endeavors.
My father-in-law made an hour drive to be there.
My Aunt Sharon and Uncle Tim came.
Other friends and family members came out as well and it means a great deal to me to have all of them there in support of Aubrey.
I try to imagine that my mom really is there watching.
Maybe, just maybe, she's on the other side with her parents and with her friends, bragging, "That's my granddaughter!"
I can imagine the smile beaming across her face and the loud cheering; the heavenly kiss upon Aubrey's cheek.
Of course, I have no proof that this scenario could really exist.
I have no idea what it's like on the other side or if they are allowed to peek in on us.
All I can do is imagine and hope.
It's the only thing that brings me comfort.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 23, 2017>
One of the strange things about Mom being gone is that the house is always empty.
Before, there was always someone there.
We had a constant flow of family and caregivers.
My dad hadn't needed to set his alarm system in a good couple of years because someone was always there.
Our caregivers became like family to us.
They were so involved in our day-to-day lives.
Mom bonded with them.
The grandkids bonded with them.
We bonded with them.
Even our extended family members bonded with them, especially through the last week of Mom's life and all of the family activities (and the funeral) which followed.
I know that several of my extended family members have become facebook friends with at least one of our caregivers, who was there every day that last week of Mom's life.
They will always hold a dear and special place in our hearts for the love and care that they gave to my mom.
It has been a little sad losing them in our daily lives.
Luckily, modern technology enables us to keep up with them but it's not the same as having them with us and talking to them all the time, like it was before.
Dad and I have talked about having "caregiver reunions" every so often, where we can get together to visit and catch up.
Switching gears for just a minute...you may or may not know that my dad got a pet pig last December.
She has brought a lot of fun into the family and has been a sort of companion for Dad.
The caregivers all adored her as well and have watched her grow from a tiny, 7 pound pig to a pleasantly plump, 65 pound "mini" pig!
We've had a lot of fun with her.
People are always fascinated and curious about Miss Piggy and lots of visits have been made, friends bringing their kids over to see the pet pig!
We've had lots of fun dolling her up with pearls and piggy polish and my aunt even made her a tutu.
This week is Miss Piggy's birthday, so we decided it would be fun (and humorous!)
to throw her a little piggy birthday party!
Since the caregivers also bonded with Miss Piggy, we decided to combine the piggy party with a caregiver reunion.
3 out of our 5 caregivers were able to attend Miss Piggy's birthday!
I wrote about the piggy party on my other blog, but the focus of this post was mostly about reconnecting with our caregivers.
It meant so much to us that they came to Miss Piggy's party (and they didn't even think we were being silly about throwing a party for a pig!)
It was really nice to sit back, enjoy a meal and just visit with them.
How thankful I am for the caregivers that we had in this journey!
We hope to have more gatherings together in the future!
And here's a little preview picture of Miss Piggy at her party.
If you want to read all about the fun we had and see some really cute pig pictures, click here.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 13, 2017>
I've had two exciting things happen this week!
One was announced yesterday as our documentary went live (if you missed it, be sure to check it out!).
The second is that I launched a new blog!!
I am excited and nervous all at the same time.
Whenever I write and put myself out there I feel a bit vulnerable...are people going to read what I post?
Will they like what I write?
Can I succeed with this venture?
I am going into this with the mindset that this is for me.
Writing is something I have always loved to do and this new blog is helping me to focus on happy, light-hearted things while expressing myself through pen (or keyboard).
Of course I am hoping and working for it to be successful!
Let me tell you a little bit about my new blog.
Of course you all know that I've gone through my fair share of grief over the past several years (but then again, who hasn't?)
I have really tried to learn and grow from my trials and make something positive out of the negative; to make lemonade out of the lemons.
This thought has gone through my mind countless times over the years: how to make lemonade out of lemons.
When I was thinking about what I wanted to write about, my mind kept coming back to lemonade, and about finding the sweet things in life.
I thought about all of the sweet things that I do have in my life and how even through the darkest of times, we can find the light.
There will always be struggles, but life can still be sweet if we search out those sweet moments and focus on the things that make us happy.
I brainstormed lots of lemonade ideas for a title and domain name for my new site, but everything was taken!
I wanted something to do with making lemonade but which also incorporated my family into the theme.
I thought about "homemade lemonade" but of course that was taken as well, and then a thought popped into my mind: Jonesmade Lemonade ("Jonesmade" in place of homemade).
I tossed the idea around for several days and finally decided to quit doubting myself and settle on a name.
Jonesmade Lemonade it is!
I quickly got to work creating the site itself and adding some content to start.
Let me tell you, it has been a lot of work!
It has consumed much of my free time.
However, I am really proud of myself.
I have never considered myself a techy person; I tend to get intimidated by computers.
I watched a lot of tutorials, joined a couple of free webinars and joined a blogging group to get help with setting up and getting my lay out how I envisioned it.
I still have some things to add, but it's getting there and I'm really proud of how it looks!!
My son-in-law came up with the graphics for me.
I wanted something simple and clean, but cute and catchy.
I love what he came up with!
And also this cute logo for social media icons: The niche I chose was family/lifestyle, which means I will be writing a lot about our family and adventures, as well as thoughts and ideas surrounding family life.
I plan to share recipes and craft ideas that make me happy and I also plan to share inspirational stories of other people who are making lemonade out of their lemons.I hope that you will all come visit me at Jonesmade Lemonade!!
I also have a facebook page here and an Instagram page here.
Show me some love! 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 12, 2017>
At long last, our documentary is here!!
Grab your tissues.
It was a mix of emotions for me to watch the video.
Part of it was filmed last summer (2016) while the last bits were filmed just this past July...only weeks before my mom passed away.
It brought tears to my eyes to see her on camera, to remember those last precious moments that she was with us.
For those who have been reading my blog over these past several years (particularly those whom I haven't met), this video really brings our family to life.
I hope you will watch it and capture a glimpse of the love between my parents and our family.
I am now calling upon every reader to please take 10 minutes to watch this short video documenting our family's journey of dementia!
When you are done, PLEASE SHARE the video!
Share on facebook, share through email, share through word of mouth...just share!!
So, here's how it works.
Zach, the filmmaker, is doing something a little bit different with our story.
Usually, he breaks one story into several clips that can be embedded into social media outlets.
For us, he decided to do our story all in one piece.
He has uploaded it to be viewed on Vimeo.
You can view the trailer to the short film, following which you will be invited to make a $3 donation to view the full story.
The best part: all of the money paid to view the video will be split between My Alzheimer's (the name of Zach's project) and The DEANA Foundation.
Can you imagine the possibilities of people we can help with our caregiving grants through this viewership?
Many of my posts have a few thousand views.
If each one of my readers views this video and shares, we have the potential of reaching thousands, of raising thousands of dollars!
Furthermore, if you missed some of my other posts about My Alzheimer's, you can read all about it on Zach's website.
Basically, he is on a mission to compile the largest collection on the web of Alzheimer's and dementia stories.
He has traveled all around the country, on his own dime, to document stories from people living through this disease.
He has spent countless hours and dollars on this project but he is determined to shed light on the disease, bringing awareness to the many challenges that come with it.
He is also highlighting different organizations who are trying to make a difference in the dementia world.
I highly recommend checking out his work!
Please join us in raising awareness and in bringing help to families who need it!
Without any further ado, I present to you our story!!
Deana's Story: Dementia and the Middle Class from MyAlzheimers on Vimeo.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 9, 2017>
Last week was a better week for me, emotionally.
I almost made it through the entire week without crying!
I decided to move forward and start writing another blog.
Much of my week consisted of designing my site, writing content and watching tutorials on how to write a successful blog, with a potential of making money.
I'd love to be able to contribute income to my family in doing something that I love-writing!
I am still waiting on a couple of things before I am ready to launch my blog, but hopefully it will be this week!
Between writing, working on my new blog and working on some sewing orders that came in, my mind was kept pretty busy.
I don't think a minute goes by that I'm not thinking of my mom, but I didn't have time to stop and focus on all of the detailed memories that usually bring on the tears.
Saturday was my birthday.
It was my first official birthday that I haven't had Mom here.
She hasn't understood my birthday in a few years, but last year I did serenade myself in a birthday song in hopes of sparking her memory.
I was able to get a grin from her.
Call me crazy, but I can't help but to wonder where she's at and what she's doing.
Did she know it was my birthday...wherever she is?
Maybe, for the first in years, she was celebrating with me, or at least thinking of me.
It's a nice thought, anyway.
Jeff and my birthday are 4 days apart, so we celebrated both of us all weekend.
Friday, Jeff took the day off work and we enjoyed a little day date while the kids were at school: lunch, shopping and a reflexology massage.
That evening, my Aunt and Uncle took my family and me to dinner; of course Dad came along as well.
It was really nice visiting with them.
I was determined to have a good day, and I did.
Jeff and the kids spoiled me with presents, hugs and kisses, and we spent the day together having fun.
We went bowling and stopped by to lookie-loo at some RV's (we still have our sights set on getting an RV!)
Later that evening, my daughter graciously babysat her brothers while Dad took Jeff and me to dinner.
My dad gave me a very nice card with a very sweet note, telling me that Mom is proud of me, and he signed it "Love Mom and Dad".
It meant a lot to me and brought [good] tears to my eyes.
Throughout all of this, he still signs every card with both of their names.
It makes me feel like a part of her is still with me, wishing me a happy birthday as well.
On Sunday, Dad and I made our usual, weekly trip to the cemetery and we were pleased to see that her headstone was finally placed.
It was a birthday miracle!
I became very choked up when I saw it.
The one thing they forgot to install was the vase, so Dad went back to the truck to retrieve an old cup and makeshift it into a vase while I sat by her headstone.
I was thankful for a few moments alone because I didn't want my dad to see my tears.
Why I am afraid of letting anyone see me cry?
For some reason it was emotional to see her headstone.
I don't know why I am surprised by anything anymore, but it did catch me off guard to feel so emotional about it, especially with how long we've been waiting for it.
I love that it's there and it was beautifully done; I daresay it is the most beautiful headstone in that entire section.
But it was probably the last thing to "handle" with her passing and it is another reminder of how final everything is.
It left me feeling a little sad and emotional throughout the remainder of the day.
But, today is a new day.
This is the start of a new week.
I have a lot to look forward to this week, if I can keep my focus!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 28, 2017>
I've had a lot of time lately to think.
For the first time since I became a mother, over 12 years ago, my entire days do not revolve around meeting the needs of another person.
I had two very big changes at the start of this school year.
One being that I no longer have my mom to care for, and the other being that my baby started first grade; all of my kids are now in school all day long.
I'm left alone for almost seven hours out of the day; alone with my tasks and alone with my thoughts.
This is a brand new experience for me.
It's been a strange adjustment.
In many ways, it has been really nice to have some quiet time, to not have to be rushing from one spot to the next, back to back.
A couple of weeks ago, I had a nasty head cold and I was actually able to sleep during the day!
What an amazing experience that was!
I have also appreciated having some time alone to mourn the loss of my mom.
Not that I lay in my bed and cry all day, but I am able to better process everything that we have gone through with some time to myself.
And there are moments where I do allow myself to lay on my bed and cry; just not all day long.
I have had some difficulty in organizing myself, though.
I always have things written down on my to-do list, but without pressing deadlines of having to be in so many places throughout the day, and having to tend to the constant needs of young children or a sick mother, I don't always feel the urgency in accomplishing my tasks right away.
You might say that there are moments where I feel a little bit lost.
My identity for the past several years has been one of a caregiver.
Now that I'm not caring for anyone every minute of the day, I'm having a bit of an identity crisis.
It's as if I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm trying to figure out where to go from here, what I want to do with my time besides cooking and cleaning the house (which isn't so much on my want list as it is on my duty list).
The one thing that I feel very drawn to is writing.
I've picked back up on writing the book that I started a few years ago, a book about my mom and our family's full journey with dementia.
I don't know if anyone will want to read it besides my dad (who has been reading each chapter as I write), but it's been a therapy of sorts for me to write it.
I have laughed and I have smiled and I have cried as I've written, remembering the person my mom was, the person that my heart aches for.
We'll see where it all goes once it's complete.
I'm also dabbling with the idea of starting another blog.
I will keep this one going because I still feel like there are things for me to share.
I recently saw a quote that said, "Your life's journey will never be the same once dementia crosses your path."
How true that is.
I will never go back to being the person I was before dementia entered my life.
My life has gone down a completely different path because of it.
Mom may be gone, but the journey is not over.
Dementia has forever affected me.
So, I will continue to write here and I am thinking about adding additional content (possibly some content from other people) that might be useful for those still in the middle of their caregiving journey.
The ideas are still in the making.
But, I'd like to write other pieces as well.
I really enjoy writing, but I don't necessarily want to write about sad things all the time.
For my own mental well being, I can't write solely about dementia day in and day out.
I'd love to write about the sweeter things in life as well: my kids, traveling, things I enjoy, etc.
I have been thinking about possibly starting another blog where I can have a happier, more creative outlet for my writing.
I think it would give me some focus in a time when I feel very scattered and unfocused, and there is some potential down the line to make money while doing it, which is always a plus, right?
If you would have told me six months ago that this is where I'd be today, I wouldn't have believed it.
I was so overwhelmed and just struggling to keep my head above water; I don't think I could have comprehended time for myself.
I'm still trying to keep my head above water, just in a different way.
I know that time is the healer and I will adapt as the clock moves forward.
I am realizing that it requires conscious effort on my part to do this, to find my happy and begin to heal. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 25, 2017>
Last week I wrote a post for World Alzheimer's Awareness Day, not knowing that an awareness day (or rather, an awareness week) existed for FTD.
FTD stands for frontotemporal lobe degeneration (or dementia), which is the category which Mom's dementia falls under.
The Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration (AFTD) is challenging all of those affected to make a social media post, sharing our stories and raising awareness along with a picture of our loved one, with the hashtag #ThinkFTD.
You know me-awareness is my middle name!
For those of you who have been following my blog for the past 5 years, you probably have a good understanding of what this disease looks like.
If you are new to my blog, you can view my archived posts, dating back to my mom's diagnosis in 2012.
In a nutshell, Alzheimer's is not the same as FTD!
Alzheimer's accounts for over 50% of all dementias, while FTD makes up roughly 20% of all dementia cases.
Semantic dementia (Mom's variation) is one of the rarest forms of FTD.
The warning signs of FTD include personality and behavior changes, trouble finding words, lack of apathy, and obsessive behaviors...just to name a few.
It is difficult to diagnose and is oftentimes misdiagnosed as depression or other personality disorders.
In fact, the average time it takes to find a diagnosis is 4 years.
It took us over 2 years and 6 specialists to finally get a diagnosis, after the doctors in our medical clinic assured us that "it isn't Alzheimer's and it isn't dementia."
Knowing what we know now, we can see that it all started about 5 years before her diagnosis in 2012, at age 50.
The doctors were only right about one thing: it wasn't Alzheimer's.
My dad and I were just talking last night about our road to diagnosis.
We were thinking back on all of the odd things that Mom said and did in the years leading up to her diagnosis.
How did we not know?
In all fairness, we did know that something was wrong, but dementia wasn't on our radar; she was way too young.
Had I known anything about FTD at that time, we would have known what we were dealing with much sooner and saved ourselves years of frustration and hurt feelings.
But how could we have known?
Please take a minute to share this post.
You never know what friends you might have who are going through changes with a parent or loved one and are lost as to what is going on.
Help raise awareness!
To learn more about FTD, please visit www.theaftd.org 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 21, 2017>
Did you know that today is World Alzheimer's Awareness Day?
Even though Mom didn't have Alzheimer's, I'm wearing purple for her today.
Alzheimer's is the most common form of dementia, accounting for over 50% of all dementia cases, but there aren't awareness days for the lesser known forms.
So I'm counting today as a dementia awareness day as well.
Also, in honor of World Alzheimer's Awareness Month, Chatbooks has created a special book that can be ordered called "What Matters Most".
I ordered one with pictures of my mom, but I think I'm going to go back and order another one with pictures of my family and the people who matter most to me.
The awesome part about this book is that for every book they sell, Chatbooks is donating $1 to Alzheimer's research at Brigham Young University's Alzheimer's Research Department.
It's really a win-win; you get a beautiful, meaningful book and a portion of your money goes to research.
You can check it out by visiting their website here.
They also have an app and if you have an Instagram account, you can set it up to automatically print out your pictures in a book every time you reach 60 photos.
I do this and have several volumes of Chatbooks now, filled with pictures and memories.
I never have to think about uploading to a photo center or organizing them in albums; I love it!
Another great place to donate, in honor of Alzheimer's Awareness Month, is at The DEANA Foundation ;) I am challenging all of you to make a social media post today about World Alzheimer's (*and dementia*) Awareness!
If you don't know what to post, just share this one!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 18, 2017>
They say that when you are feeling low to think of all your blessings and it will help to lift you up.
The past couple of months have been full of highs and lows.
I miss my mom terribly, and now that she's gone physically I feel like all the years of missing her have hit me like a brick.
I missed her while she was alive, but I tried to keep it together to care for her.
I still had her here to hug and even talk to, even if she didn't understand.
Now she is gone, and the grief of the past 7-10 years have caught up with me.
My mind turns back to so many things....back to how she was before she was diagnosed; back to the little changes, before she was diagnosed, that left me feeling hurt and bitter; back to learning how to love her again, despite her illness; back to the past year, months, days and hours of her life.
It's hard to not look back and wonder why.
Why did this happen to my mom?
Why did God allow this to happen to her?
So many times we had prayed for a miraculous healing.
Where was our miracle?
I don't think there's always a why.
Sometimes, bad things happen to good people.
Sometimes God steps in and sometimes he lets life play out.
Sometimes there's a reason or a bigger purpose, and sometimes it's just the luck of the draw.
Either way, I do believe that there are things that we can learn from each hand we are dealt.
We can choose to let the grief consume us and to crumble under the pressure, or we can choose to grow and stretch ourselves in ways that we never thought possible.
That doesn't mean that there aren't moments of grief.
I have spilled many tears along the way and continue to do so even now.
But, as I sit back and reflect on all we've been through, I realize that we have been blessed many times along the road.
God didn't answer our one big prayer; Mom never found a cure.
But there were so many, many little prayers that were answered along the way.
The journey has been hard, but I know he didn't turn His back on us.
I thought it might help to write down some of the blessings, the miracles, the answered prayers, that we have witnessed over the past several years.
To start with, Mom never knew what hit her.
In her younger years, she did make mention a few times about how she was afraid to die or leave behind her family at a young age.
It was such a pain to get her diagnosis but in a way it was a blessing that it took so long because Mom never had to know that she was living with a terminal illness.
Mom was able to be home until the very end.
This is not typical of this disease.
It was so important to my dad to keep her at home and I know that's what Mom would have wanted, too.
No doubt she lived longer because she was able to stay home.
It wasn't easy, but it was a big blessing to us to have her home.
Mom never got violent.
So many people with FTD become violent and end up having to be sedated or living in a facility.
I don't know how we would've been able to manage her at home with caregivers and grandkids and so on if she had become violent.
We always had the help we needed.
During our transitional time, we had sweet ladies from our church come over to volunteer and watch Mom.
We had family help for a period as well and every time we started to get worried about needing to hire another caregiver or two, someone turned up.
Up until the very end, Mom never became fully incontinent.
While she spent her last year in diapers, it was mostly just pee that we had to change and she still used the toilet on occasion.
I won't get into full details on the toilet issues, but what a blessing it was to not have to change poopy diapers on a daily basis.
I know that was one thing my dad worried about and don't get me wrong, we did have messes to clean on occasion.
Since she went through the toileting motions everyday, it helped significantly to ease that burden.
Mom was healthy.
Pneumonia and UTI's are common and frequent in dementia patients and we were lucky to not have even one UTI, infection or pneumonia incident.
We had one hospitalization earlier on to remove her gall bladder; other than that we rarely had to take her to the doctors for any kinds of sicknesses.
It made it more difficult getting her qualified for hospice, but how fortunate for her and for us that we didn't have to deal with the challenges of sicknesses and hospitals!
Mom never forgot Dad, and I believe she never forgot me either.
She said both of our names up until a few months before she passed away.
Even though she couldn't speak any words those last few months, she knew who my dad was and she seemed to know who I was.
She forgot most everyone else (although she may have known deep down and was unable to communicate it), but I am especially thankful that she always knew my dad.
When her time was nearing the end, there was a lot of fear and anxiety.
The biggest thing we worried about was her being in pain and having a dramatic, painful, end-of-life experience.
We prayed a lot, especially my dad.
He asked God to spare her the pain, to let her go in her sleep.
That is exactly how she went.
Her passing was very peaceful and she didn't seem to be in any pain during those last few days.
Lots of prayers went up for family members (who wanted to say their good-byes) to make it in time to see Mom before she went.
The night nurse on that Tuesday night before had thought she'd pass through that night, or by the end of the day Wednesday.
The last visiting family member flew in Friday morning and Mom passed Saturday morning.
Everybody made it to see her and she spent that last week surrounded by so many people who loved her.
Let's not forget to mention the timing of it all.
The big bummer was that we missed my cousin's wedding.
BUT, the timing of everything was truly amazing.
When Mom started to take a turn, and I had a big gala that I was putting on for the foundation, I became worried.
I admit that I did pray that nothing would happen before the event, and she was spared during that time.
Having everything happen during the summer allowed my brother and his family to be here for most of the summer, both to spend time with her and to be with her during her last moments.
I will forever be grateful that they were here with me during those last two weeks, especially when the hospice doctor came to give his assessment.
All of the grandkids were out of school and able to be where they wanted to be: by grandma's side.
We opted out of the extra curricular activities over the summer, a decision I had struggled with but had turned out to be another blessing.
Family, friends, church family...we were blessed with so many great people who helped us to get through this hard time from meals to the funeral luncheon to gifts and cards.
I've written a lot about this on my other posts, so I won't get lengthy here, but I do believe people were inspired to do all that they did to help us get through.
They were our angels.
There are so many other little miracles we saw along the way.
Like the time when we had to take her car keys away and it turned out she had a flat tire and wouldn't have been able to drive that day, anyway.
Or the time that she wandered onto a busy street and a church member just happened to be passing by and found her, putting her in their car and driving her home.
Or the time when my sister arrived, just in the nick of time, to intercept my dad's coin collection that she was attempting to spend on her sleep aid medicine at the store.
Or even the fact that the cashiers at the store watched out for her during that time (when she would sneak out of the house to try and buy her meds!)
We always seemed to be one step ahead of disaster and it was nothing short of a miracle.
We all have our own beliefs and I am certainly not trying to force mine on anyone.
To me, it seems obvious that there were moments of divine intervention, so many more than I even wrote about.
So many prayers were answered along the way.
I cannot be convinced that any of this was coincidence.
I will always mourn the loss of my mom.
Maybe the day will come where I won't sit and wonder why.
Maybe.
Mom didn't find a cure, but God helped us through.
I am grateful for the tender mercies and the blessings that we have been given throughout this journey. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 29, 2017>
It's been exactly one month since my mom left this life.
In some ways, it seems longer and in other ways, I can't believe how quickly that month passed.
It has been such a mix of emotions for me and I admit that it has been much harder than I imagined it would be.
While I am glad that she is free from her suffering, I miss her immensely.
I feel like I am finally able to mourn her loss fully and completely.
Bits and pieces have been going for a long time now, but it's been difficult to fully grieve while she was still here physically.
And we learned to love her even with her disease, so there's almost a second loss here.
It's a complicated grief process.
For the two weeks following Mom's passing, we had family in town.
My adopted-daughter was here, some aunts and uncles and friends from out of town had come in.
My brother and his family stayed here (at my dad's house) until Mom's services were over and it was a big comfort to me to have him here.
I worried about my dad, so it was a relief to know that Joe was there during that rough transition and Dad didn't have to be alone in the house while everything was so fresh.
We drew close together during that time and in many ways I feel like our bond was strengthened.
So many times throughout this journey, I have felt alone and it was nice to have sibling support to get through this.
As a family, we made funeral arrangements together and ran our errands together and spent every evening at dinner together.
I think there was maybe one hour of time throughout that entire two weeks that I was ever alone.
The week of the funeral, my boys went back to school.
The week after, my daughter started junior high but she only had half days that entire week, so I wasn't alone for most of the day.
Last week was my first full week of this new life I am adapting to without Mom.
It was such a strange feeling to get the kids off to school and not have anywhere pressing that I needed to be.
I almost didn't know what to do with myself.
Don't get me wrong-there are plenty of things I could or should be doing with my time.
My sewing business has orders to fill.
The foundation always has work to be done.
The housework and laundry are never ending.
There's grocery shopping/errands, meal prepping, bill paying...yet I have been struggling with the motivation to get any of it done.
I have been slowly pushing myself to get up and be productive (it's not in my nature to sit around and do nothing), but I admit there have been a few days where I've gone back to bed for a bit to cry, or visited Mom's grave instead of tending to my chores.
Other times, I have taken time out to read a book or to write in my journal or look through pictures, or do other things that I'm usually "too busy" to do.
I'm learning to be patient with myself and allow myself the time I need to grieve.
I have always felt like I needed to be strong and pull myself together for everyone, but I'm realizing that I need to take the time for myself to grieve.
It doesn't mean I'm weak.
Sometimes all I need is a good cry and then I'm able to pull myself together to get through the rest of the day.
As for my dad, he went back to work a couple of weeks ago.
He's like me (or I'm like him); staying busy is how we get by.
Fortunately (or maybe unfortunately, depending on how you look at it, ha ha) my sister and I live close by.
Her kids are over there often while she works and we go over often and invite him out.
He has made it his Sunday tradition to visit Mom's grave after church each week.
This past Sunday I went with him.
He leaves her flowers in his Big Gulp cups, since they haven't installed the vase yet (I say that that is how Mom knows it's from him; anyone who knows Dad knows that he likes his Big Gulps).
The cemetery had also been taking their sweet time on getting Mom's temporary marker in, so Dad took the liberty of making one himself.
As it turned out, they finally got her marker in, but I like Dad's better.
The sadness in losing my mom will never go away; I don't expect it to.
I will always think about what she's missing while I'm raising her grandbabies; about what they are missing by not having their grandma in their life; about what we all are missing by not having her here.
I only hope that the sad moments will become less and less as time begins to heal my wounded heart. 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 24, 2017>
I mentioned in a previous post that Mom had started talking about what she'd want at her funeral years before she was diagnosed.
She named a family friend from church, Dave Robinson, as a good person to give a eulogy.
He had given the eulogy for our good friend, Travis Alexander.
I think it may have been after that when she mentioned how well spoken Dave was and how he'd be great at this.
We asked Dave if he'd do the job and he was very humbled and honored (and I think very surprised) by our request.
We couldn't have asked a better man to do the job.
He came and sat with our family for an evening while we talked and shared stories of Mom, he taking notes on his laptop.
He combined his words from our interviews with my writing and we also found a precious letter written from my mom to my dad, which he used at the end.
I haven't ever mentioned this before...I guess because I'm unsure if I can really succeed with it and I don't want to embarrass myself, but I actually started writing a book of our journey, starting at the very beginning of when Mom and Dad met.
I started writing about a year ago and made it to about 50 pages, but I took a break when life got a little too crazy.
I sent all that I had written over to Dave, just to help him fill in the gaps of anything he wanted to mention in his eulogy.
He ended up cutting and pasting some of it, preserving the way I told the story.
I love that he combined some of my mom's own words, taken from the letter and also from her journal that we had recently found.
It turned out to be a beautiful eulogy and some family members, as well as friends who were unable to attend her funeral, have asked for a copy.
So here it is!
I hope you enjoy reading about my beautiful mother.
Deana Rae Alves Deana Rae Alves was born Deana Rae Harrington to Beverley and Frederick Harrington on May 11, 1961 at Riverside Community Hospital.
She was supposed to be Dean Raymond so that the room situation would work out at home, but, surprise, it was a girl and Dean Raymond was now to be Deana Rae.
Deana was the youngest of 5 children after Michael, Ellen, Claudia and Jeff.
She grew up right here in Glen Avon with many fond memories of her childhood on Gordon Way.
She used to like to pick up gum off the street and recalled many rides and walks to the liquor store to buy penny candy, frozen milk shakes and sodas.
There was a store called Bramletts where she would go to buy gifts for her family.
Deana recalled having two great talents as a kid: choking on food and spilling her milk at dinner.
She fondly remembered always having cats running around the house and loved her special dog named fudgy.
She attended Glen Avon Elementary as well as Jurupa Junior High School.
She was a good student with perfect attendance landing her name on a school plaque...she also became the school spelling bee champion.
One childhood story that stood out to her is shared in her own words: "I believe it was the spring of 1970, only a few days before my ninth birthday.
My big sister, Ellen, took me to the Riverside Plaza to shop for a present for my brother Jeff and myself (Jeff's birthday was exactly one week before mine and he was going to be eleven).
I remember we picked two shiny sirens for our bicycles.
Oh, the excitement I felt at the moment.
I couldn't wait to show Jeff and hook them up to our bikes.
At last he finished the installation and off we raced, each one taking turns being cops and robbers.
We live on an L shaped, dead-end street which had just enough of a grade to build up some good speed.
The wind raced through my hair as I pushed the button on my siren and was yelling "pull over!"  The last thing I remember was looking down at the blurry asphalt.
I was down.
I didn't feel the pain as the street shaved the right side off my face.
Jeff looked over his shoulder as I went down and prepared to transform from robber to ambulance driver, thinking I was just faking, but, as he neared the scene he realized I wasn't moving.
Someone picked me up and took me inside, bloody face, shaking and tried to comfort me.
Ellen was scared and that scared me.
Dad raced through the intersection, honked his horn and didn't stop.
He quizzed me in the truck holding up fingers and asking me my name.
When we got to the hospital, the emergency room nurse said it wasn't an emergency and we would have to go to walk in.
There was a 2 hour wait and Dad blew his stack yelling at the nurse and screaming for a doctor, "my daughter had an accident and doesn't know up from down and you tell me I have to wait 2 hours??!
!" The doctor came out, looked around, accepted me in, cleaned my face, did x-rays and gave me a shot." At age 13, she moved across town to Overland Street in Riverside.
Her Dad had just remarried a woman named Edie.
Moving into Edie's house meant having three new step-brothers and a step sister.
It was her step-siblings who dragged her across the street to introduce her to the gang (affectionately called the Overland Street Gang).
This mischievous group of neighborhood kids met secretly behind the bushes, out of their parent's view, as they passed around cigarettes.
Deana would have never thought about touching a cigarette, but, in an effort to fit in and be "cool", she accepted the cigarette and drew it to her lips.
She tried to make it seem like she knew what she was doing, but, it was evident by her lack of inhaling the tobacco that she knew very little about smoking.
As the kids talked and laughed lightheartedly, 13 year old Deana couldn't help herself from glancing up at the boy standing across from her who introduced himself as "Buddy".
She recognized him as the boy who lived next door; she'd noticed him before.
He was one year her senior, but a couple of inches shorter.
Still, there was something about that short Italian boy, his olive skin, his shaggy dark hair and his light hazel eyes that drew her to him.
He was quite the contrast of her own pale, freckled skin, red hair and blue eyes.
Their eyes met a couple of times and it seemed like their comments to each other may have even been a little flirtatious, but, she knew a boy like him would never look twice at a girl like her.
"Boys don't like freckle-faced redheads", she'd told herself.
Little did she know, but he had a thing for redheads.
Later on in life, he would tell her that he loved her freckles...that he always wanted to connect the dots.
Throughout the next couple of weeks after their first meeting, Deana would hang around outside, catching glimpses of him but never daring to initiate a full conversation with him.
Sometimes she would sit on the curb and watch him play football in the street where he would take off his shirt puffing out his bare olive-skinned chest.
Every now and then they would coincidentally meet in the backyard where Buddy bred rabbits.
Other times he would be working in the garage and she would see him there.
He pretended to be focused on whatever job he was doing but he always knew she was there and always kept cool.
One day when he was hanging out in the garage with his friend DJ and having grease on his hands, Deana approached the driveway.
He glanced over at her and turned to DJ saying, "Don't just stand there, get the lady a seat".
She was both flattered and impressed with that gesture.
He called her a lady.
It was the first time that she felt a boy ever noticed her and treated her like the young lady that she was becoming.
If she wasn't smitten before then, she was most definitely smitten from that moment on.
They spent the next couple of hours talking about everything getting to know each other better.
On July 3rd, Deana and her brother Jeff were hanging out in their backyard when Bud saw them outside and came over to join them.
They engaged in some light conversation, which led to them flirting when suddenly Jeff blurted out, "Why don't you just kiss him already?
You know you like him!" Deana turned five different shades of red but Bud wore a grin on his face.
Jeff had confirmed his hopes that the freckled faced girl-next door was crushing on him.
It wasn't long after Jeff went into the house that Bud pulled her in, wrapping his arms around her waist and kissed her, Deana kissed him back...their first kiss.
Later that day, Buddy slid the homemade copper ring that he wore off his finger and onto hers asking, "Will you go steady with me?" Over the next couple of years, their relationship continued to bloom.
They spent their fair share of time making out.
They would make out over the fence, in the fort, you name it they made out there.
They were crazy for each other.
One day, they were making out pretty heavy in the garage.
Bud had her pressed up against the washing machine.
The pressure must have been just too much on Deana because all of a sudden she let one slip out against the washer.
The sound reverberated and she was absolutely mortified, but, Bud, in only the way he could spin things, simply laughed and told her "Hey, everyone farts." Later in life, Bud would share these stories with his own young kids in front of Deana.
She would stand by and blush when he'd share them.
He never let her forget the washing machine incident and she never stopped blushing over it.
No teenage romance goes without some drama...there were times of breakup.
During one such breakup, they were outside hanging out and still flirting with each other.
Somehow the conversation amongst their friends had taken a turn and Deana made the comment to Bud: "Maybe for a man, but not for a boy"  Well, Bud was not about to take that shot to his ego in front of his friends.
He chased her around the yard, tackled her to the ground and she landed on her shoulder.
She let out a painful scream and stood up, turning her back to hide her tears as she ran back into her house.
Soon Deana's father emerged from the house yelling at him: If you ever touch my daughter again I'll kick your ****"  Deana appeared a couple of days later with a brace on her shoulder.
Bud felt terrible and Deana never let him forget about it.
Later on in life, when they would have a small disagreement, Bud would say to Deana: "Keep that up and I'll give you a matching collar bone" :) During her junior year, Deana found religion.
Her brother Jeff had started going back to the LDS church of their childhood and began teaching her once again about things.
She took to it and was baptized while still living on Overland next to Bud.
As time rolled on, Deana would have to move with her father who got a divorce once again.
She would have to finish out her senior year at Corona High School instead of Arlington HS.
Now in the Church and away from Bud, she became more involved, attending church regularly with other LDS kids.
Upon graduation, she met and became serious with a man named Eddie, also known as Fat Taco Eddie.
They had talks about getting married, but, despite the blooming relationship, she was still calling Bud on the phone and having long conversations.
Things ended abruptly with Eddie when she found out he wasn't being totally honest with her.
Later in life in the 90s, Deana ran into Fat Taco (Eddie) at the Hostess discount store.
She was wearing a tight spandex outfit and Fat Taco had a really, really big wife...Deana walked out of there proudly saying to herself, "I got the good end of the stick." Deana continued to call and talk to Bud, but she didn't want a relationship with him anymore because of his drinking and smoking.
Bud still had feelings for her but he wasn't ready to give up that lifestyle.
Still, they saw each other now and then and continued their phone conversations.
It wasn't long before religion started to come up in their conversations.
Deana would share scriptures with him and teach him things about the church she had joined.
She told him about one of the fundamental beliefs of the religion; that families were meant to be together forever.
This idea piqued his interest, having been the child of a broken home.
One night in September of 1980, after a long night of pondering, Bud woke up and decided he was done with it.
He was done with the drinking and the smoking; he was done with that lifestyle.
He quit it all cold turkey and never looked back.
Not long after, Deana called again.
In the course of their conversation, Bud told her that he had quit drinking and smoking and explained that he was changing his life; he didn't want to end up like his parents.
Deana replied, "I'll be right over".
She showed up on the doorstep  and they had a "heart to heart".
They talked a lot about life, they envisioned their future; their hopes and dreams.
Pretty soon, the conversation included the words "one day when we're married".
There was no formal proposal, they made the decision that they wanted to spend the rest of their lives together and never looked back.
Things moved swiftly, and on November 16, 1980, Bud was baptized by his soon to be brother-in-law Jeff.
It was a beautiful day for all...he had left behind the lifestyle of partying and was excited to move forward with Deana on their new forever journey together.
Things were falling into place and it was an exciting time for the young couple.
Unfortunately, a wrench was thrown into their wedding plans when Bud was let go from his job at the transmission shop just six weeks before the wedding.
Over lunch the next day, they began discussing their plans.
They realized now they wouldn't have the funds to put on the lavish affair they had originally been planning.
The invitations had not been sent out yet, so, it was decided...forego their original plans and bump up the wedding to only two weeks away.
February 28, 1981 was the day.
The ceremony was small; only family and close friends were invited into the Church's small Relief Society room.
The Chapel was already reserved for another event but it didn't matter to them.
The people who mattered could all fit into that small room.
They each had their best friends by their side at the altar; Jana as the maid-of-honor and Kenny as the best man.
No entourage of bridesmaids and groomsmen followed; they were content with only the two friends.
The ceremony was followed by a small and simple reception and then they were off to a short weekend honeymoon to Disneyland staying at the nearby Hilton hotel.
The early years of their marriage brought about very humble beginnings.
Both worked hard to make ends meet.
Deana worked at TG&Y;...she was the breadwinner for the first couple of months.
Bud spent the first month looking for work and found odd jobs.
By May, he had landed a job with the phone company.
After living with Bud's mom for the first month, they were able to get a small one bedroom apartment of their own.
It was furnished with secondhand furniture...they were poor, but they were happy.
Very soon after they were married, Deana discovered she was pregnant.
She was just 19 years old and Bud was 20.
They were young, naive and could barely make ends meet.
They felt a little bit stressed about how they would support a baby.
Deana was sick and throwing up, struggling to get to work each day.
One afternoon in June, Bud received a phone call at work from Deana, she had just finished with her routine prenatal appointment at the doctor's office....she said, "I have something to tell you, We're having twins!
Bud nearly fell over in his seat.
Panic sunk in; how could they afford two babies when they were barely scraping by to take care of themselves?
On a bright, sunny day in early October, Deana started having contractions, she labored for hours...this was a difficult labor.
Soon it was apparent that one of the babies was in distress.
They would have to perform an emergency c section and Bud was not allowed to come into the delivery room.
As they wheeled her away, leaving him alone, he worried about his wife...would she be ok?
Would the kids be ok?
In this worried state, all his anxieties and fears slid down his cheeks in tears as he prayed to God that He would watch over his new wife and his babies.
God heard his prayers and soon the doctors came to report two healthy babies, a boy and a girl, Joe and Cassandra...they marveled at the little babies in their arms.
It was October 7, 1981 Life was a little rocky for the new little family.
Within one year, Bud and Deana had become engaged, dealt with unemployment, gotten married and had two babies.
Deana's Mom fortunately lived just down the street from their apartment.
Grandma was patient and nurturing.
Deana's relationship with her mother grew a lot during this time of her life.
Eleven months later on September 11, 1982, Bud & Deana would take their two little children to the Los Angeles LDS Temple, kneel around an altar and be sealed together as a family for time and all eternity.
This was a highlight of their lives...a joyous occasion never to be forgotten.
The summer of 1983 brought another round of stress for the family.
Bud received a notice that they were phasing out his job at the phone company.
After giving birth to the twins, Deana had to give up her job at TG&Y; to take care of the babies.
That very night, when Bud arrived home from work after finding out the bad news, Deana gave him a bit of good news.
"Nancy Ballantyne called today and said they are looking to hire some more guys at Continental and she and George are wondering if you'd want to come work for them".
Bud didn't know anything about tile at the time, but, with the dark cloud looming overhead about his upcoming joblessness, this news was a ray of sunshine.
He was a hard worker and a quick learner.
He accepted the job and ended up working there for twenty years before branching out on his own and starting his own company.
A year after this new job, Deana gave birth to another baby girl, Christina on July 10, 1984.
She was another unexpected pregnancy and, by this time, the twins were three years old.
This birth was much more smooth and pleasant.
Deana was much more relaxed and Bud was allowed to witness the birth this time.
With the family growing and Bud's job succeeding, they soon outgrew their apartment and moved into a small three bedroom, rental home.
Later on one night, while sitting at the dinner table, Deana told Bud that she had toured a home earlier that day...they had begun the search to buy a home and Deana felt like she had located "the one".
It was a modest 1200 s.f.
home with four bedrooms, two bathrooms a living room and kitchen.
The back yard wasn't huge but it would accommodate the kids nicely.
Soon, the trip was made to view the house on Candlelight as a family.
It needed a lot of work, but, Deana saw potential in it.
Bud was not thrilled but Deana was, but he figured they would fix it up, stay in it for a year or so before they sold and upgraded to another house.
Thirty years later, it is still the place called home.
Deana was the epitome of a homemaker and a good mother, she took great care of her home and the kids.
She always had dinner on the table at night...very rarely eating out.
She loved to bake and would make each child a cake, including Joe and Cassandra their own cakes on their shared birthday.
She loved holidays and would spend time baking goodies to hand out to family and neighbors, her most famous goodie being her English toffee.
She was a room mother for each of her children and present at all their events...she even became a supervisor at their school and was known as the "nice supervisor".
When it came to cleaning, Deana ran a tight ship.
She took great pride in her home and every child was expected to do their part.
She had a rotating chore schedule during the week and Saturdays were reserved for deep cleaning.
She would blast songs from favorites like Queen dancing around with a broom sometimes grabbing the kids and making them dance with her trying to liven things up during the boring cleaning.
Deana loved tending to her garden, with Bud gone many Saturdays working, she enjoyed mowing the lawns, pruning the flowers and working in the vegetable garden.
She was a penny pincher - didn't shop for anything unless it was on sale.
She would save money all year long from the family budget along with recycling for family vacations and Christmas presents.
The kids would go to pic n save with the recycling money to buy Christmas presents for each other.
She was a very good driver....she was only in one little fender bender accident...in Corona at a stop light.
The kids were fighting in the back seat, she let off the brake and tapped the guy in front of her.
Also when she was very young she clipped a big rig.
Deana was a young Mom and grew up herself right along side her family...learning as all parents do through the ups and downs of daily life.
She would wake the kids up by singing "oh what a beautiful morning" and then saying "rise and shine".
If they didn't get up, she would squirt them in the face with a water bottle (oh how they hated that).
On one occasion, when Christina was talking back in front of her Aunt, Deana reflexively swung her hand around accidentally hitting Christina on the lip just right catching a tooth and busting open her lip...she was horrified.
On another occasion, she broke a wooden spoon on Joe's butt.
She would use a wooden spoon on him because it would hurt her to use her hand.
That spoon remained in the kitchen for years to come.
She would play Nintendo Dr. Mario with Joe and also enjoy her time in Scouts with him.
She would cherish the time Joe took her on a date to the Museum of Tolerance when he was 20.
Deana would always feed Joe's ego telling him how handsome he was and that the only person more handsome than him was his Dad.
She hated when Bud would teach Joe "code words" while on the job...these code words were about girls and it just bugged her...the boys just loved bugging her.
She loved old black and white movies and musicals...loved to watch the Turner Classic Movie Channel.
She loved movies like the Sound of Music, the Ten Commandment and West Side Story.
She would sing the songs and then try to make her own corny songs out of them.
Her All-Time favorite was An Affair to Remember, she always cried at the ending.
Never once did the kids see their parents fight...just little occasional disagreements.
Every day Dad kissed Mom goodbye in the morning and then kissed her when he got home from work.
Sometimes he would grab her butt and make out in the kitchen.
When the kids would say "oooo" Mom would say back "at least you know your parents love each other".
Deana started taking night classes while the kids were in school and went for an early childhood degree because she wanted to be a school teacher.
She didn't make it to a bachelors to be a kindergarten teacher but did get her early childhood associates degree and worked in the head start program.
She gained many friends while working as a head start teacher.
Deana made sure that her family was raised in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.
She would make sure everyone was always up each Sunday and at Church in this very building, the 44th St. building (that her father helped to build).
She and Bud participated in the church by accepting callings.
Bishop Frank Vargas remembers when she was called to be the Young Women's President, she felt very inadequate but went on to be a wonderful leader that all the young women loved.
Time marched on and the kids all married bringing beautiful in-laws and grandchildren onto the scene.
Time and aging also brought an unexpected twist into her life.
On March 7, 2012,  Deana was diagnosed with Semantic Dementia - A Rare Kind of Dementia under the Frontal Temporal Lobe...this coming after an exhausting two years of going to all kinds of specialists trying to figure things out.
The next five years would be a difficult and challenging time.
Watching Deana fade away slowly over time was painful, it was not fair.
Why was she of all people struck with this robber of all things normal?
She was too young to have something like this strike her.
Christina said it best recently in a heart wrenching post:  "This morning at 6:40 am, my mommy took her last breath after being comatose for 3 days.
She was 56 years old.
Dementia is a monster that began robbing me of my mother piece by piece before she was even 50 years old.
Nobody can know how horrendous it is to watch your loved one deteriorate before your eyes until you witness it yourself.
Life isn't fair and makes no sense at times, but Heavenly Father never promised it would be.
Stolen from us was a loving mother and grandmother, devoted wife, exceptional preschool teacher, and compassionate friend.
Mama, I miss you more than words can express.
You didn't deserve this premature ending.
I will carry you in my heart now and forever." Deana Rae Alves passed away on July 29th 2017 in the presence of all of her family in her own home...the little home on Candlelight.
Deana's short life was full and rewarding wrapped inside a romance many of us only dream of...in her own words: "I recall when we first saw each other.
I was thirteen and your were fourteen.
I don't think we were even introduced, you were just there.
Sitting on the grass in your oversized jacket, puffing on a cigarette.
The young hoodlum!
For some strange reason I felt like I was supposed to impress you by acting like a silly, flirtatious girl.
I think I succeeded only in making a fool of myself.
A few months later, I became the girl next door.
Every day filled with anxiety, hoping to see you smile at me as I got home from school.
I hoped my step-brothers would bring you around so I could see you, never thinking you would like me too.
Soon we began to talk to each other.
I would watch you work on lawnmower engines in your garage.
too embarrassed to let you know I was crazy about you for fear you would think I was ugly and didn't like me.
Fact it-it's not easy growing up read-haired and freckled!
I remember one time as I watched you in your garage you turned to D.J.
and said, "Don't just stand there, pull up a seat for the lady!" Wow!
Was my fourteen year old heart a flutter.
Then came the moment of truth.
My brother Jeff blurted out, "Why don't you just tell him you like him." I wanted to crawl in a hole and die!
What a rocky romance.
For two years, off and on, off and on.
It finally ended in the summer of '77.
We buried our feelings for each other over the next three years.
Occasionally they would resurface only for me to run away from them.
Our lives were quite different.
Even though I had strong feelings for you I never saw you as the marrying kind.
Sure, we kidded around about it when we were young, but, who really thought we would get married one day.
I dated other guys and went back to church while you smoked and partied.
Then one day you gave it all up and there I was, ready to be serious with you.
Through all our arguments and bad times I never regretted the day I said, "I do".
We have both grown and matured but we've always been able to compromise, which is why our love grows stronger.
You have been a wonderful husband.
Loving, giving and supportive.
Here are a few lines you dedicated to me: If the sun refused to shine, I would still be loving you.
When mountains crumble to the sea, there will still be you and me.
And so today my world it smiles.
Your hand in mine, we walk the miles.
Thanks to you it will be done, for you to me are the only one!
All my love eternally, your wife, Deana.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 21, 2017>
I remember a conversation my dad and I had a few months ago.
Somehow we got onto the subject of when that time would come that Mom would pass away; I don't know how it came up, but when we were talking about people coming to the funeral, dad said "There won't be a lot of people there, nobody's gonna come."
I felt sad that my dad felt this way.
I don't think he said it because Mom was never loved.
I think he said it because he felt like she was forgotten.
Dementia can be a very lonely road.
The very sad truth is that a lot of people stop calling and visiting once a person is diagnosed with this disease.
I think there are many reasons for it.
Sometimes people just don't know what to say or how to act.
Maybe they didn't know if visiting was appropriate.
Maybe they thought there was no sense in visiting someone who couldn't remember them.
Maybe they just wanted to remember her the way she was.
It's also a very long, drawn out disease and for everyone who is not living it everyday, life goes on.
Everyone has their own hardships that they are dealing with and we each have our own lives and families to focus on.
Whatever the case may be, it is still hard for the people who are here with her, living this disease and mourning the loss day in and day out.
There are many times of loneliness and wondering if people care.
I'm not writing any of this to shame or guilt anyone; I don't want anyone reading it to feel that way.
Grief is a very personal thing.
During the last week of Mom's life, we let friends and family members know of the situation and opened the door for anyone to come visit.
I think that Dad was very surprised by the response that we received.
Mom always had a steady flow of visitors; there was always someone by her side.
I can say for myself, that these visits are what got us through what was one of the hardest weeks of our lives.
We felt so much love for us and for my mom.
Tears were shed but sweet memories were also shared and beautiful moments were witnessed.
We had people show up who have been here regularly, who haven't been here regularly; some came from out of town.
My dad asked me to take pictures of every person who came to visit Mom, so I'm sharing them on this post.
One of Mom's dearest friends from high school, Cheryl, came down almost as soon as she heard the news.
Cheryl has kept in touch over the years and has been calling to check in on Mom.
She has been such a concerned and loving friend.
She lives in Northern California and as soon as I made the call to her that Mom had taken a turn, she made arrangements to make a visit.
She had no vacation time left, but that didn't stop her.
She spent all afternoon on Saturday driving down, arriving to her mother's house late in the evening.
She spent all morning until late afternoon on Sunday with Mom before turning back around and driving back home.
Fortunately for Cheryl, Mom was still awake and even walking around (this was one week before she passed).
She was able to sit with her, talk to her and love on her.
A very sweet thing happened when Cheryl was there.
She was sitting by Mom's bedside as Mom napped and her hand came out from under the covers.
She grabbed Cheryl's hand and very slowly brought it back under the covers, holding tight and snuggling it against her heart.
(This happened with some other people over the next few days, but Cheryl was the first).
This is just my own personal belief, but I believe that in that last week of her life, Mom was aware of who was with her.
I think her spirit knew each person that was there and although unable to communicate it verbally, she communicated it through touch.
How grateful I am that her dear friend made that last visit to her.
(Cheryl doesn't like her pictures online, but she approved this older photo of them together, taken the year Mom was diagnosed, 2012).
Every one of Mom's caregivers paid her a visit-both past and present.
By Monday, we had relieved all caregivers of their duty.
Yet, they still came to visit and one came almost every single day, staying throughout most of the day and continuing to care for her throughout the process.
Some of her volunteer caregivers (who were "relieved" over a year ago, when Mom was transitioned into diapers) also came to visit.
They all formed very sweet relationships with Mom throughout their time of caring for her and they grew to love Mom very much.
(I don't know what happened to the picture of her caregiver, Linda, but she was there too.
Maybe we forgot to get a picture?)
Every one of Mom's siblings came to visit her as well.
The local siblings came a few times.
Her brother, Jeff, flew in from Pennsylvania Thursday afternoon.
We weren't sure if he was going to make it in time, but Mom held on for him.
Some of her siblings-in-law came also.
My Aunt Peggy (dad's sister) flew in on Friday and my Aunt Sharon (another of dad's sisters) was with us the whole week.
Uncle Tim, (Aunt Sharon's husband) was also there with us a lot.
Aunt Sharon actually spent a few nights with us; she was by our side almost the entire week and I will forever be thankful for that.
She is also an RN, so it was very comforting to have her there.
It was comforting to have all of our family there!
A couple of my cousins also came to say good-bye.
Of course all of her grandkids were with her all week.
My daughter, Maurina, flew in from Colorado on Wednesday.
Most of the time, they all slept over; they didn't want to leave grandma.
I think they found comfort in being together.
There were many tears shed but also sweet moments as they cuddled with grandma, rubbed her back and arms and gave her kisses.
Hard as it was, I'm glad that they were able to be with her and I know they wouldn't have wanted it any other way.
I'm sure Mom was comforted to have her sweet grandbabies by her side.
So many other friends and neighbors came to visit.
I don't think they'll ever know how much that meant to us!
I really do believe that Mom knew they were all there.
We joked that that was probably the reason why she took so long to leave (she lasted 2-3 days longer than the nurse Tuesday night thought she would); she was enjoying being loved on by so many.
There are a couple of friends that I forgot to get a photo of and I've been kicking myself ever since.
One was her dear friend, Janna Marcroft, whom she's known for over 30 years!
(Sorry we missed your picture Janna!!)
We also missed our family friend, Carl Harris, who came to visit and left us with prayers that we greatly needed.
Hopefully that's all I'm missing (and Linda).
So sorry!
I was so thankful for Danielle (caregiver) and for my Aunt Peggy, who took over with the picture taking.
I was so emotional at times that I kind of forgot.
Of course her children and husband were by her side.
On one day (I can't remember if it was Wednesday or Thursday), we had a little beauty day.
I was finally able to groom her toenails and I painted them cute for her.
I groomed her fingernails as well and Danielle painted them.
We put a little make-up on her (just some eyebrows, eyeshadow and lipstick) because we all know that Mom would've wanted to look her best for her vistors.
Here are a few pictures I wanted to include.
Dad got in the pedicure spirit and my sister-in-law, Natalie, painted his toenails!
Ha ha.
It helped to lighten the mood.
I know there were many others who would've loved to come visit but were unable to.
We have felt everyone's love through the dozens of cards, flowers, foundation donations, gifts, meals, attendance at her funeral, etc.
When Mom's time did come, people were there to love on her.
Her funeral was packed; I didn't see any empty seats in the chapel.
Friends and family members traveled from far just to be there; people we didn't even give thought to coming!
It was a testament to me of the many people who do love and care about her and the rest of our family as well.
Thank you to every single one of you who have been here for us through this difficult time.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 15, 2017>
My dad asked me the other day if I was going to continue writing my blog.
I've thought about it a lot.
What can I write now that this is all over?
There are still so many things I want to say, things I want to write down so I can remember.
But beyond that, I'm not sure where to go.
Over the next little while, I may write down some of the thoughts and experiences that we had during Mom's last moments of this life.
My dad and I thought it might be a good idea to keep this going and share helpful information, updates with The DEANA Foundation, etc., so we will see where it goes.
Hopefully people will want to keep reading, but if not, it's therapeutic for me to write anyway.
For this post, I wanted to share about Mom's funeral.
There were some friends who weren't able to make it to the service but wanted me to share this with them.
Mom's service was held last Friday, August 11th at the church building she attended as a child and then later moved back to (about 30 years ago).
This place was her other home.
She spend many hours worshipping, praying, teaching, fellowshipping and serving in that building.
It seemed only appropriate to hold her services there.
Despite the sadness and loss, it was a beautiful service.
It's an interesting thing: years before Mom passed, she started talking about what she would want at her funeral, "just in case".
She shared who she thought would be good at giving a eulogy.
She picked out her favorite hymns that she wished to have sung.
She wanted my sister and me to sing (the one wish I just couldn't honor...I didn't feel strong enough to sing, but my sister did a beautiful job).
My family and I took notes of everything we had remembered her planning for her funeral and put together a beautiful program, honoring her and the life she lived.
We did have a viewing beforehand.
Dad really wanted her to look like herself as much as possible, and I know that Mom would've wanted to look her best.
Mom had told me on several occasions that she wanted me to do her make-up (she didn't want it left to a funeral home who didn't know her style), so I gathered all the strength I could to honor that wish.
It actually ended up being a sweet thing, but I'll save that for another post.
Her wonderful hairdresser, who she'd been going to for close to 25 years, went to the mortuary and cut and styled her hair for us.
What an amazing gift that was.
She looked beautiful and peaceful, as though she was sleeping.
In all of the times I'd thought about a funeral, I was always uncertain if I should bring the kids or not.
But it seemed to be natural to bring them to the funeral.
They all had their sweet moments with grandma before she passed, and they would've been very sad to not attend her funeral and give their last good-byes.
David Robinson put together a beautiful eulogy.
My parent's love story was the highlight, a love that saw my Mom through her final days.
I'm going to see about getting a copy to add to this post.
We used a slideshow that my husband put together for our gala (you can view the slideshow by clicking here).
I absolutely loved this slideshow, especially the video footage that he was able to get in there.
I feel like it brought her back to life, if only but a minute.
My sister sang a beautiful song, which I know my mom would be proud of.
She loved Josh Groban (the original artist who sang this song) and the words were so appropriate to Mom.
I don't know how my sister held it together, but she did.
Her friend got some video of her singing.
Mom's brother, Jeff, also spoke.
They were the closest of the siblings and it was sweet to hear his memories and stories of my mom from her childhood.
I also spoke, on behalf of my family.
I shared some of the things that Mom taught us in this life, little life lessons.
Some were more serious, while others were humorous and I included some stories and memories to illustrate how she taught us each thing.
This included things both before and after her dementia.
One thing my dad and I talked about was not leaving out the dementia parts of her life.
Hard as they sometimes were, this was still a part of her life and we loved her despite the changes that the disease brought on.
In fact, we have many funny stories and memories during this time of life, and we will cherish those forever.
Lastly, we had closing remarks from a dear friend and also leader in our church, Carl Harris.
He gave us a beautiful message of hope and healing, reassuring us that this isn't good-bye, but just a "see you later."
Mom is happy and free.
She is reuniting with her parents and other people she loves.
We are the sad ones, as we have this void without her here.
But it isn't the end; we will be together with her again someday.
After her funeral service, we traveled to the cemetery where she was laid to rest.
Something kind of comical (at least, now it's comical)....when we arrived to the cemetery, the plot that was 2 spaces to the left of my grandparents was dug up.
We were a little worried about this because my dad had been thinking that he bought 2 spaces to the right; we thought they'd dug up the wrong grave!
Turns out, Dad had looked at the map wrong, so for the past year and a half, he's been taking pictures of the wrong spot.
Ha ha.
We were just relieved that they didn't dig the wrong spot!
Mom's kids and grandkids each got to keep a purple rose from Mom's arrangement.
Dad also bought carnations for each person to throw down on her casket after it was lowered to the ground.
Something that brought tears to our eyes was when they lowered the casket; my 3 year old nephew watched as they lowered her and repeatedly said, "They dropping grandma, why they dropping grandma?"
I didn't think that he really understood all that was going on; just goes to show that kids pick up on more than what you think.
Sweet baby.
Our wonderful ward (church) family put together a nice luncheon back at the church for all of our family and close friends after all of the services were done.
It was nice to be able to come back and sit down with family and not have to worry about fixing a meal or going out somewhere to buy ourselves food.
They even decorated with purple (which was our theme for the day, since purple is the color for Alzheimers/dementia awareness).
They even packed up the leftovers and sent them home with us, so we didn't have to worry about cooking that evening or the next day.
What a burden that was lifted from this sweet service that they did for us!
We had a slideshow playing (with lots more pictures that people sent in of Mom) during the luncheon and my husband and I put together a track of some of Mom's favorite music that he had playing in the background.
I kept myself busy in the week before the funeral by sewing up pillows for all of Mom's grandkids, made out of her shirts, that they each got to take home with them.
I embroidered a poem onto the fronts of the pillows, a message from Grandma to her babies.
"This is a shirt I used to wear Whenever you Hold it Know I am there Love, Grandma" My dad said it perfectly, in one conversation we had after Mom's passing: it's like we are mourning 2 losses here.
One is the loss of the person she was, the life that we had with her (the life that Dad and she had built together).
The second is the person she became.
No more obsessive tapping on the doors, no more giggling like a little girl when we give her hugs, no more grabbing dad's hand to take him to the back room to show him the laundry pile that she threw into the corner of her bathroom floor.
We miss those little things, yet we still also grieve the person she was before all of this.
It's a complicated grieving process.
We are very grateful to all of our family members and friends who came to Mom's service and who have been here for us over the past few weeks.
We are thankful for all of the wonderful caregivers that have helped us on this journey; all of her caregivers were there and they have become like family to us.
We feel another void not having them around everyday.
Several family members and even friends traveled from afar to come pay their last respects to Mom.
I had friends who didn't really know my mom, but who came just to be a support to me.
We've had meals brought in, gifts left for us, sympathy cards, flowers, phone calls, texts...the list goes on.
My dad and I both want to express our deepest appreciation for all of these kind gestures.
We couldn't get through this without the love and support that we have received from everyone around us.
Since the week before Mom passed, we have had a constant flow of family of friends coming and going.
Dad's house hasn't been empty at night since Mom's passing and there have been very few moments that either one of us have been alone.
On Sunday, the last of the family members left for home and we are now left to settle into our "new normal" without Mom here.
It is hard, but made so much more bearable by the love that we have surrounding us and the faith and hope that we will be reunited with Mom again someday.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 31, 2017>
I wanted to put out all of the information for my mom's funeral services for all of those who wish to attend and honor her.
My cousin is getting married in Colorado this weekend, so we didn't want to infringe on her special day.
For this reason, we are waiting until next week to hold services for my mom.
The information is as follows: Friday, August 11th 8660 44th St, Jurupa Valley, CA 92509 Viewing: 9:00am-10:15am Family viewing/prayer: 10:15-10:30 10:30-12:00ish: Funeral service Following the service, any of those who wish to travel to the graveside are welcome to follow us over to Crestlawn Cemetery on Arlington Ave. We felt like it would be meaningful for everyone to wear something purple.
It doesn't have to be the whole outfit; if you want to wear black or gray or whatever, you can add a purple accessory (a tie, scarf, jewelry, etc).
Purple is the color for Alzheimer's/dementia.
It isn't required, of course, but we thought it would be beautiful to incorporate purple into the service.
Thank you to everyone who has called, texted, visited, sent dinners and gifts, etc.
Your love and support means the world to us <3 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 29, 2017>
It is with a heavy heart that I write this post to let you all know that my dear mother passed away this morning at 6:40.
Our prayers were heard in that it was a peaceful passing; there was no gurgling or gasping for air, her heart and her breathing just gradually slowed to a stop.
She had her 3 children, beloved husband, daughter-in-law, sister-in-law and oldest grandson by her side as she took her last breath.
Afterwards, her siblings and other family members and in-laws (and grandchildren) all surrounded with her love in her home.
A close friend and clergyman from our church came over as soon as he heard the news and left our family with a sweet prayer as we all crammed into her bedroom by her bedside.
While I know that she is freed from her pain and suffering, and I know that she is having a beautiful reunion right now with her parents and other loved ones, we are all left broken hearted.
This cruel disease took her from us way before her time.
Her departure from us leaves a huge hole that can never be filled.
Thank you all for your prayers (I believe they did make a difference) and all of the thoughts and words of comforts.
Thank you to those who came to visit with us this week and give my mom love before she left.
Thank you for the dinners and the goodies left on the porch.
We are blessed to have so many wonderful people in our lives to help us through our grief.
I will post an update as soon as we confirm funeral services (which will likely be done on Monday).
I can say that we are aiming for the 11th or 12th of August, due to the fact that my cousin is getting married (in another state) next weekend and we don't want to take anything away from her special day.
I will post an update as soon as we know so that friends and family members from out of town can make arrangements to be here to honor my mom. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, July 28, 2017>
Mom is still hanging on.
She is one heck of a fighter.
She has been sleeping (comatose) for over 48 hours now (not counting the 12 hours before her abrupt waking on Wednesday morning).
Up until last night, her breathing was 6 breaths a minute but it has changed to more shallow breathing with short periods of apnea in between.
There have been a few times where she has gotten gurgley (when we've moved her or given her meds).
It's a little scary to hear her when she gets like that.
She has had a fever for the past few days which has been rising daily.
The Tylenol hasn't been helping to manage it at all.
Today, it climbed up to 102.5, so we made some ice packs to put under her armpits and neck to help cool her off.
Despite the fever, her feet and extremities are cold.
We haven't been able to get a blood pressure reading on her arm today either.
The nurse came to visit today (we've had nurses' visits daily) and she explained to us that the fevers, cold extremities and inability to read the blood pressure is due to the recirculation of blood.
As her body is shutting down, the blood is circulating more to the vital organs (in her core) and is basically being cut off from the other parts of her body.
Because of all of this added work on her heart, her pulse is up to 135.
The nurse was very compassionate and spent some time with us explaining the process and asking if we had any questions (we've had Aunt Sharon with us for most of the week, and she's already explained all of this to us so we already understood her condition).
When she left, she said she'd see me at our next scheduled appointment on Monday, but that she honestly didn't think Mom would still be here by then.
The good thing, the nurse said, is that she seems to be at peace.
She doesn't appear to be in pain; she is in a content, deep sleep.
She is surrounded by many family members and friends who love her.
It is now up to her when she wants to go.
Mom has had a lot of visitors this week and it's been sweet to see the friends and family who have come to give their good-byes.
We've had family members fly in from out of town and she even had her high school friend, Cheryl, drive 7 hours this past weekend just to spend one afternoon with her.
All of her caregivers have come to spend time with her, all of her siblings, some friends from church.
All week has been a family sleepover with grandkids who don't want to leave and her kids all around her.
Even though it may seem like she doesn't know what is going on, her eyelids will sometimes twitch when someone speaks to her.
I do believe she hears us and knows that we are all here.
That's probably why she's still here-she's enjoying all this love that she's been receiving. 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, July 27, 2017>
I didn't get a post up last night because, in all honesty, we thought her time was close and we were all gathered around her into the early hours of the morning (until we all started passing out ourselves from sheer exhaustion of the past few days).
After my last post on Tuesday night, we went to turn Mom, who had been in a deep, unmoving sleep for hours, and she was non-responsive.
She was still breathing, but it had become labored and she was only taking 6 apnea-like breaths a minute.
She was running a low grade fever and she didn't even flinch when we touched or tried to move her.
We gave her a Tylenol suppository, checked her blood pressure, moved her body, changed her diaper...and absolutely no response to any of these things.
By all accounts, she seemed completely comatose.
I called the hospice nurse helpline and they sent out a nurse to check on her.
The nurse arrived around 11:00 pm and I could tell by the look on her face that she was concerned.
I could tell that she was choosing her words carefully and hesitant to say what she was thinking so I told her that we understood what the breathing meant.
She got tears in her eyes and told us that she was so sorry.
She felt that, in the state she was in, she was likely to go by the next day (yesterday).
By the time we were finished talking and assessing, it was midnight, and I sent out some texts to her siblings to let them know, in case anyone wanted to be by her side.
I called my brother so he would know to get here soon (my sister had already come over just before the nurse got there).
I also called Aunt Sharon, who had been here earlier in the day and wanted to know if anything changed.
She and Uncle Tim came over right away (and she's been here ever since, as Mom's personal RN).
None of us got any sleep that night.
We each took turns to have a private moment with Mom to say whatever we wanted to say to her.
We sat by Mom's side and held her hands...and just waited.
All of the sudden, at 5:30 in the morning, Mom woke up and almost immediately started trying to get up, but she hardly had the strength to sit up (it required someone sitting behind her to hold her up).
She became very agitated and restless and was looking around at each person in the room.
At different times, she would grab our hands, one time she looked at me and brought her hand up to my face.
Other times, she would stare intently at different spaces in the room where nobody was sitting, yet it seemed that she was looking at someone.
[There was also a moment earlier in the day where she rolled over in her bed and stared straight into my empty rocking chair (I had moved to her bed to rub her legs).
She looked right where I'd been sitting and then slowly reached out her hand to the armrest, just like she had been reaching out for our hands throughout the day].
She also kept pointing to the corner of the room and fixing her gaze there.
Sometimes, her face looked pained and she kept trying to turn over to get comfortable.
We gave her some meds to try and calm her but she wasn't settling down.
The nurse came by again and gave her a stronger medication to help her relax and finally, around 11:00, she curled up in her corner again and went back to sleep.
My brother got in at noon and spent time by Mom's side, rubbing her arm and stroking her hair.
Mom had some visitors trickle in throughout the day, including a couple of her caregivers who have been relieved of their duties but still wanted to be with Mom (they've come to love her over the time they've cared for her).
Her bathing nurse also made a visit and we gave her a bed bath.
She slept through it, although she was a little more responsive his time around as she kept trying to turn back over on her side.
Her breathing remained the same throughout the day, 6 breaths a minute.
She didn't wake up again, but she seemed to be comfortable and not feeling any pain.
That evening, a family friend (and Ecclesiastical leader from our church) came to visit our family.
He gave my mom a sweet prayer blessing, blessing her with the comfort to know that her family is here and loves her, that we will be okay and lean on each other to get through this.
He told her that there are angels on the other side, family members who are waiting to help her on both sides.
He also left my dad and me with a prayer and blessing of strength and comfort to get through what is to come.
It was a nice visit and he left us (or at least me, since I can only speak for myself) with comfort and a little more peace.
The anxiety and knots in my stomach that I have been feeling for the past couple of days have finally settled.
I needed that prayer.
Later that night, we rolled Mom to a new position and heard some rattling in her chest.
Her pulse has gotten weaker and Aunt Sharon felt like she was getting closer to the end.
We all gathered around her bedside: my dad laying by her side and her kids and grandkids surrounding her and rubbing her and holding her hands.
We stayed like that for a couple of hours, until the exhaustion of the past few days became too much and we started to fall asleep, one by one.
The kids retreated to their campout on the living room floor, my brother and his wife took the bed across the hall from mom, and the rest of us crashed on Mom's floor or in chairs.
Dad didn't move from her side on the bed.
Throughout the night, we all awoke at different times to check on her.
Miraculously, she is still here with us this morning.
Her brother flies in from Pennsylvania at 1:00 this afternoon, and I told her a few day ago that he would be here.
They were very close throughout their lives and he's the only sibling that hasn't been here to give his good-bye.
I do believe that she hears us and knows us at this state and several of us feel like maybe she is waiting for her brother.
We also have a couple other family members coming (my daughter comes at 4:00 today and my Aunt Peggy, dad's sister, comes at 7 am tomorrow).
When Mom is ready, she's ready.
Until then, we are keeping her comfortable and cherishing our last moments to love on her in this life.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 25, 2017>
The day started at 1:00 this morning; I was startled awake by the sound of Mom coughing next to me.
I popped out of my chair and she was coughing stuff out of her mouth.
Because she can't swallow, the medicine residue and saliva had built up and she was (luckily) coughing it out.
I called out for Dad, who wasn't on his air mattress beside her.
Of course she waited for the moment he went to the bathroom to do this.
After the incident, dad slept beside her on her hospital bed.
I don't think the nurse did a good enough job explaining this part to me.
I don't know what I was expecting, but I wasn't really expecting all of those secretions and since then we have been diligent about swabbing her mouth to remove the excess residue.
By 4:00 am, Mom tried to sit up.
This time it was with a lot of effort.
She became very restless, laying down and then sitting up, pointing to the doors (like maybe she wanted to go out for a walk).
We gave her more meds but she was still restless for another hour and a half.
I sat at the foot of her bed and rubbed her legs and feet in hopes of soothing her and that seemed to settle her down; she finally fell back asleep around 5:30.
By 7:00, she was awake and restless yet again.
She wasn't due for meds quite yet but she seemed very agitated, like maybe she was in pain.
We gave her her next round of meds a little bit early and she tried to sit up again.
She couldn't stand, but Dad was able to hold her into a standing position to give her a stretch and put her in the wheelchair; we thought maybe she'd like a little ride around the block.
The morning air was cool and she did seem content as we pushed her up and down the street, but by the time we got home she looked ready to rest again.
Throughout the day, this pattern of restlessness and agitation continued.
She seemed uncomfortable and in pain.
I spent a lot of time rubbing her body in hopes of calming her.
She seemed to relax a lot more when people were touching or rubbing her.
I brought my essential oils and used them on her legs and back, hoping her help her find relief.
In the meantime, I had put a call in to the nurse, who made her way to the house around 10:30.
She agreed that Mom seemed to be uncomfortable and in pain, so after consulting with the head nurse and doctor, they decided to up her dosage of morphine.
It took a while to kick in and there were still spurts here and there where she would wake up and start turning in her bed.
She wanted to keep sitting up, but by the end of the day, she was too weak to do it on her own :( By late afternoon, she finally settled down and fell into a sleep and I began to notice small changes in her breathing.
My Aunt Sharon (the RN) also noticed.
It is as if she is breathing in, holding for a few seconds, and then releasing.
I know what this means.
She has been laying in the same position for past 3 1/2 hours without flinching.
I fear that when I am finished writing this post and go to try and turn her that she won't wake up from her sleep.
I'm not gonna lie, I am really struggling today.
Dad has been busying himself with cleaning up the house.
I know it is extremely difficult for him to see her at this stage; he was hoping beyond hope that it wouldn't come to this.
He was hoping for the miracle that she would go quietly in her sleep.
It is devastating to see her like this.
My heart feels like it is breaking into two.
I have prepared myself as much as I possibly could; I've read and learned all I could to mentally strengthen myself for this day and now that we are here, I am breaking.
I don't know if my heart can take it.
My brother drives back in tomorrow night.
My Uncle Jeff, Mom's brother, flies in from Pennsylvania on Thursday.
My daughter, Maurina, flies in Thursday afternoon and my Aunt Peggy early Friday morning.
I am hoping that they each will have a chance to say good-bye.
And I really need them here to help me get through this.
I know my dad does, too. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 24, 2017>
Last night I slept at Mom's house, just in case Dad needed me in the night.
She seemed to sleep pretty well, until the morphine wore off around 3:00.
As soon I heard Mom's bedroom door open across from my old bedroom that I was sleeping in, I sprung awake.
I met Mom in the hall, who was being guided by Dad as she shuffled slowly down the hallway.
Dad was bracing her, but she was very wobbly and looked very weak.
Dad carefully walked her to the living room and back while I got her next dose of morphine ready.
After giving her her meds, and changing her diaper, we were able to get her back into bed and Dad laid on one side of the bed while I laid on the chair next to her.
It seems like 4 is the lucky number; she is content for about 4 hours until she due for her next dose of morphine.
At 7:00, she sat up in bed (while we prepped the meds) but she didn't get up to walk this time; she was too weak.
The next time she sat up was 10:00, and still she was unable to walk.
It took great effort for her to even stand up, and that was with her arms around our necks and us bearing her weight to help her stand.
We brought in the wheelchair and got her and took for a short walk outside.
Our dear neighbors from down the street (whose daughter was my best friend all through grade school) were coming over to visit Mom at that same time, so they walked with Dad and me up the street until it started raining and retreated us back into the house.
Throughout the remainder of the day, Mom was unable to regain her walking ability.
We took her for a few walks in the wheelchair, but it is a great effort to get her in there and I fear that tomorrow it may be too difficult for her.
Luckily, her hospital bed arrived today and that has been helpful in positioning her more comfortably and getting her up into a sitting position.
The nurse also made a visit.
She has had a few low-grade fevers off and on but not high enough to warrant the Tylenol suppository.
Her heart and lungs sounded okay, but her oxygen level dropped a little too low (87) so the nurse told us to keep oxygen on her.
I thought she was going to rip the tubes out of her nose and she has fussed at them a couple of times, but she's actually kept it on most of the day.
Mom had quite a few visitors today and to be honest, it was a nice distraction for us.
Mom laid and slept with her visitors sitting by her side.
She was peaceful for most of the time, until the meds started wearing off.
When the meds wear off, she starts to get restless.
Her faced has looked a little more pained and she's been rubbing at parts of her body that seem to be hurting.
I (and others) have been rubbing her back and legs to help her discomfort.
I rubbed her legs and feet with lotion hoping that it might soothe her.
Some of the older grandkids have been trying to help her get comfortable as well: stroking her hair, holding her hand, adjusting her pillows, and giving her rubs, which has been really sweet.
She seems to enjoy the rubs and on several occasions her hand will slowly slip out from beneath her blanket to reposition my hand on a particular spot that she wants me to rub.
There is one spot on her back-hip area that she keeps moving my hand to.
If I even slip a few inches below that spot, she will move my hand back where she wants it!
At least we know that she's finding the comfort in the rubs.
For now, I have kind of moved myself in to Mom's room.
My husband brought in my comfy recliner from home and it's parked next to her bed.
Dad has set up his mattress on the other side.
Dad's taken his leave from work and my husband has been very understanding with my need to be beside her.
Luckily, the kids all want to be here too (along with their cousins).
I think they are finding their strength and courage in each other.
If there's one thing I want them to learn from this, it is how to come together as a family to help those we love.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 23, 2017>
Some people have been texting and asking for updates on mom.
I will try to be better and post updates daily or at least every other day.
I know that friends and family who are far away want to be kept in the loop and it's easier to write one post than to make several calls and texts.
We appreciate all of the texts, phone calls, visits, thoughts and prayers that we have received.
Last night, we started Mom on morphine.
It's been really difficult to determine if Mom is in pain, due to the fact that she can no longer communicate; even her expressions are gone.
I've been trying to read up on kidney failure just to get an idea of signals to look for that could indicate that she's in pain (especially since the doctor said to expect it in the next few days).
I stumbled onto a couple of websites that spelled out the 10 symptoms and she fits every single one.
I think reason would say that she's in pain.
For the past couple of days, she's been especially restless.
She has been unable to lay down and sleep for more than a few minutes at a time and she looks completely exhausted.
When she was finally laying down, I noticed her legs shaking/rocking, feet tapping and she would rub her hands over her face as if she's frustrated.
Her skin has looked flushed and today, her cheeks are puffy (which, from what I understand, means that her kidneys are unable to excrete excess fluids, leading to swelling in other parts of her body).
All of these signs lead me to believe that she is feeling pain, and how can she not when her kidneys are shutting down?
The decision to administer the morphine hasn't been an easy one.
My dad is worried about unnecessarily giving her meds and over-medicating her; he doesn't want her to become a "zombie".
It's a scary step because it means we lose that last little bit of spark left in her.
My Aunt Sharon (who is an ICU nurse) was over last night, and made the same observations that she might be uncomfortable at this stage.
She talked to my dad and the decision was made to give her some morphine.
It really has calmed her down and she has been able to rest so much more peacefully.
The side effect, however, is grogginess while she is awake.
She does still try to get up and walk around, but when she does we have to follow beside her because she is losing strength and becoming wobbly.
It is painful to see her like this.
But the thought of her being in pain is even worse.
We are trying to take it day by day, hour by hour and adjust as needed.
We put in a call for her hospital bed; it should be here by tomorrow.
I think that will help her with getting up and down and put our minds at ease about her falling out of bed.
Also, as much as we want to think it won't happen, she will probably not be ambulatory for much longer.
We are making plans to have someone in her room with her at all times now, so that will mean taking shifts throughout the night.
My sister-in-law and I dusted and tidied up her room today and I brought over some lavender oil to diffuse in her room.
We've put on some of her favorite, calming instrumental CD's to play softly in the background.
We are trying to keep her calm and relaxed through this process as much as possible.
We have all been taking turns sitting beside her throughout the day.
This afternoon, I sat next her and she had her blanket over her face (a funny thing she likes to do while she sleeps) and was seemingly asleep.
All of the sudden, her hand slipped out from the blanket and felt for mine.
Her body didn't stir, her eyes were still closed, but she firmly held onto my hand and pulled it up to her face.
It was such a sweet moment, it brought me to tears.
She knows that I'm here and I know that she feels comfort in being surrounded by so many people who love her.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, July 20, 2017>
I was halfway through writing another post, all about Mom's hospice assessment on Tuesday, but after events of this afternoon, all of those details seem long and drawn out and unnecessary; quite honestly I just don't have the energy for it all.
To summarize the events of the past few days, Mom was put on hospice on Tuesday.
We were a little surprised that they finally approved her, given that she's still ambulatory (the reason why we were rejected before).
This time, we had a great nurse who listened and looked at all of the evidence (food logs, weight logs, etc) and pled our unique case to the doctor.
They both agreed that she was appropriate to receive the service and we breathed a sigh of relief; finally, we are receiving help!
The past couple of days have consisted of nursing visits (by both the RN as well as the bathing nurse), social workers and finally, today, a visit from the doctor himself.
We were hoping for some insight from the doctor of what to expect in the coming weeks and possibly months, and I think that even though we knew what we were facing, we were still caught a little off guard with the news he delivered.
To start with, Mom's eating and drinking has dwindled down to practically nothing.
In fact, for the past 2 days she has only had a few bites and a few sips of water.
She has been sleeping for long periods of time throughout the day; I'd guess that she's been sleeping close to 20 hours out of the day.
We have noticed some blood in the urine bowl and dad wanted me to ask the doctor about that (dad had to work; the doctor was scheduled to come mid-morning so I told him that I'd be there to meet with him).
The doctor arrived mid-afternoon.
I'm very thankful that my brother and sister-in-law were there with me to speak to him, for support and also so they could hear what he had to say.
When he arrived, the three of us went back to Mom's room with him so he could see her and talk about her situation.
He had already reviewed the detailed notes given to him by the nurse and we filled him in on her lack of eating and drinking over the past couple of days.
I also explained that she appeared to have blood in her urine.
He started to tell us that she was in fact, shutting down, but he hadn't given us any kind of timeline at this point.
My brother and I brought up our concerns and reservations about leaving on our upcoming family vacation (we had planned to travel to Colorado for my cousin's wedding in a couple of weeks).
At that point, he gave it to us straight.
He told us that we should not go anywhere.
He then told us that we were probably looking at 2-3 weeks, a month at most.
The blood in her urine indicates renal failure and he said that within a few days, her kidneys would likely be shutting down.
After that, it will be a domino effect with her other organs.
He told us to contact any family members or friends who would like to see her and to tie up any loose ends.
He stood with us in silence as we absorbed the information and held back tears.
We asked some more questions and he answered them all, very compassionately yet matter-of-factly.
I have been feeling like the time is getting close, but I honestly wasn't expecting this news today.
No sooner than the doctor drove up the street to leave than my dad drove down the street, arriving home from work.
He asked if the doctor had any insight for us and that's about when I lost it.
It was very difficult news to have to deliver.
There was an initial shock and as you can imagine, this is very difficult news for everyone to come to terms with, but most especially my dad.
After some time to let it all sink in, Dad asked me to call certain family members and friends for him.
Please don't be offended if you didn't get a personal call from me; this has been a little overwhelming for me, too, and I asked some Aunts/Uncles to help me contact everyone.
At this time, he really isn't up to talking to anyone on the phone.
He gave me permission to give updates on this blog, but he is asking for friends and family members to please not make posts about this on Facebook; he would rather this be the one spot for people to get their information from.
Also, it's just too hard for him to see these posts right now.
While she is our Mom, our sister, our friend, she is his wife.
As much as we love her, nobody can be hurting right now as much as my dad.
For those family members and friends who would like to visit with Mom, he is open to having visitors.
I would suggest for those who want to do that to reach out to and coordinate with me so that we don't overwhelm Mom with too many visitors at one time.
Thank you all for your thoughts and prayers throughout this journey and especially now, during this difficult time. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 17, 2017>
I've gone back and forth about writing this post.
I've written and re-written and debated if I was being overdramatic about the way things are going.
I thought maybe things would improve and that Mom was just having a bad day (or two).
But in the pit of my stomach, I know the tides are changing.
We are entering the end stages of this disease.
From the beginning, we've known that this illness would be terminal.
The only question has been how it would play out.
Many people are taken from pneumonia or other infections; others simply stop eating.
It is the process the body goes through when shutting down.
Over the past 8 months, Mom has lost over 60 pounds.
Every month, and now every week, she is losing weight (she lost another 4 pounds last week).
Her eating has gradually declined over the months.
Last fall, she was eating full-sized pb&j; sandwiches.
Then she started only eating about half, so we were making her half-sized portions.
Eventually, those were cut down to quarters.
Over the past couple of weeks, those quarters became eighths, and finally, within the past couple of weeks, she isn't finishing the eighths.
If we are lucky, she will take a couple of bites before getting up from the table and walking away.
Many times (more and more) she will sit down to eat, watch us make the sandwich, and then stare blankly and eventually walk away without taking any bites.
A couple of months ago, we started keeping her food log again where we write down the time and amount of food she eats.
From there, we are able to see how much she is eating per day and even per week.
Up until the week of June 17th, she was averaging about 3 1/2 sandwiches a day (give or take, depending on the day) and her weekly average was 21 sandwiches.
A couple of weeks ago, that average changed to 15 sandwiches per week and for the past two weeks it's dropped down to 10-11 for the whole week.
As I am typing this, I am sitting in her living room while she sleeps in her room.
It is after 11:00 (am); she woke for an hour but has not eaten or drinken a thing at all yet today.
Even more worrisome than the food situation is the water.
She only drinks when she eats, so you can imagine where that is going.
For a few weeks now, she's only been finishing one water bottle (16 oz) of water.
Now, it's a good day if she gets in a full 16 oz.
Most days she'll drink about 12 oz and on a few bad days she drinken as little as 8 oz.
Basically, she's living on about one sandwich and 12 oz.
of water a day; for this week, anyway.
Each week gets worse and worse.
As you can imagine, it's only a matter of time before this takes it's toll and her body begins to shut down, and I think it already is.
I believe she is becoming dehydrated already.
She has little urine output, her skin is extremely dry, her cheeks are looking sunken in.
She is sleeping a lot throughout the day.
She will sometimes nap for hours during the days; once she wakes up, she'll pace around for a bit before returning to lay down again.
She hasn't been "talking" much.
Her voice sounds faint and weak when she does attempt to speak, which isn't often.
Her interest isn't held on anything for more than a couple of seconds.
We are having trouble getting her to take her medicine (swallowing is part of that problem).
She has had a couple of falls as well.
Last week, my dad went to check in on her in the morning and he found her laying on the bathroom floor, halfway into his closet.
The bruising up and down her side confirms our suspicions that she somehow fell and was unable to get up.
I know what you all might suggest: hospice.
At our last evaluation, they told us there was nothing they can do until she either: no longer walks, develops an infection/pneumonia (has some other medical need), is in pain.
Even lack of eating or dehydration won't qualify her.
Yet, home health was coming in for a few weeks and has decided to close her case because there is nothing they can do for her; they are in the business of helping people get better (the nurse agreed that hospice is more appropriate for the situation).
So right now, Mom is falling between the gaps of our healthcare system.
I'm not going down without a fight, though.
After talking with several people in my online FTD support group, and upon their insistence, I have put in another call to a different hospice company.
Speaking to those who have been through this, or are currently going through the same thing, my initial instinct has been confirmed: that Mom's time left with us is limited.
Whether we have weeks or months, I can't say.
If she continues her decline at this rate, I would say a few months at best.
Needless to say, these are rough waters for us right now :(
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, July 7, 2017>
The past few months have been incredibly busy: taking care of my home and family, keeping up with my home sewing business, chauffeuring kids to various activities, taking care of Mom (with bathing and nurse visits and whatnot).
To top it all off, I had the crazy idea of starting a non-profit foundation a couple of years ago and we decided it was time to put together our very first charity gala.
We gave it the theme "Memory Masquerade" with the idea that it would be an elegant evening that would allow us to come together and honor the memory of our loved ones who have been affected with dementia.
The masquerade took 7 months of planning and prepping-it almost felt like planning a wedding!
We had to pick a venue, choose a caterer and a menu, find entertainment, work out decoration details, find sponsors and donations, make connections within the community, plan a program.
It was a lot of work!
Luckily, I had a committee of fantastic volunteers; I could not have done something like this on my own.
I feel like a fire has finally been lit with the foundation.
People are learning about who we are and people want to get involved.
There have been many moments of discouragement along the road, times when I've questioned my sanity at the attempt to start this charity in the midst of my crazy life.
But the past 6 months have brought about much growth and all of the efforts that we've put into this are finally beginning to pay off!
To start with, we have received our very first grant, through the County of Riverside, to help fund the event.
It wasn't large (the largest grants they are giving out are $1,000, which is what we received), but it helped a lot and gave us (the committee) the confidence we needed to move forward.
For the first time, we were able to secure sponsors for our event and we received some great donations for our silent auction!
Some of the awesome things we received include a helicopter ride, lunch with the Mayor of Riverside, an autographed copy of Kimberly Williams-Paisley's book, professional photography packages...the list goes on!
Best of all, we had support from friends, family, and others within the dementia community.
In the months before the event, I became very anxious and worried.
What if, after all of this planning and prepping, nobody showed up?
What if we only broke even with our overhead costs or worse, what if we ended up in the negative?
Other (more experienced) members of my committee tried to reassure me that no matter what, it would be a success.
They told me that if we got 40-50 people out to a first-time gala, it would be a success; if we broke even in our expenses or made just one or two thousand dollars, it would be a success.
I told them I wanted to shoot higher: my goal was 100 people and $10,000.
I saw some of my volunteers wince as I said it.
They told me I should expect half of that.
I started to second guess myself.
I decided I better not set my hopes too high.
If we could reach those numbers, I'd be thrilled; but if we only had 40 people show up, I knew I'd be really discouraged.
Fast forward past all of the tedious details leading up to the night of the gala.
Nobody wants to read about all of the sweat and tears that went into it!
Suffice it to say that it was a lot of hard work but I am proud to say that the evening was a big success.
We ended up with 75 people on our guest list and we raised over $9,000!!
(That does NOT count in the value of everything that was donated to us for the event!)
Even though we didn't quite reach the goal I had set, it exceeded my realistic expectations of the evening.
We had rotary club members and representatives from the city and the Mayor of Jurupa Valley (a long time friend of our family) came and emceed the event.
One of the greatest things for me, on a personal level, was to have so many family members come out to support what we are doing.
My dad and his sister and brother-in-law came, one of my mom's brothers (and his wife) came, my mother-in-law, father-in-law, and a couple of my husband's siblings came.
My twin brother and his wife came in from Arizona.
For most of these family members, it was their first time attending a foundation event.
It meant so much to me to have them all there.
I was so happy that they could see what it is that we are accomplishing with the foundation.
We also had a very touching tribute, honoring those who have been affected by dementia.
It started with a slideshow of my mom and then transitioned into a slideshow of others who have been affected.
My husband put hours into this slideshow and I must say, it was a masterpiece.
I debated on sharing it online, but I've decided I am going to save it for another time.
We also had a beautiful table decorated to honor those currently fighting/those who have lost their battle with dementia.
We made keepsakes for the families to take home with them.
There were some things that I would do differently for next year, but all-in-all it was a very successful event.
Our guests all seemed to enjoy themselves.
We had a photo booth (with a photographer on spot) which really added a lot to the evening.
The decorations turned out beautiful.
I think everyone went away feeling that it was a lovely evening.
As we were cleaning up, one of our volunteers (who has been to just about every charity event in the city) made the comment to me, "This is by far THEE best first time gala I have EVER been to."
Needless to say, I was on cloud 9 for the next few days!!
It is hard to put into words what this foundation means to me.
It is so much more than just raising money to help other people.
Of course, that is why I started it; I wanted to help other people and build a community of support for those going through this horrible disease.
But this is also a way for me to remember my mom, to keep her alive and a part of my life.
When she is no longer here with us physically, this will be her legacy.
Through this foundation, we are able to keep her memory alive and honor the life she led.
We are able to give people that same opportunity-to honor and remember their loved ones.
It is so easy to be overcome with grief when going through this journey, but this has truly helped me to work through that grief.
It gives me a sense of purpose and the opportunity to "make lemonade out of the lemons".
I am excited to see where this next year brings the foundation, and really looking forward to making the Memory Masquerade even bigger and better next year!
Parts of the event were videoed and will be featured in the documentary that is being filmed about our family journey with dementia (it's due to be completed by the end of this summer!)
I will definitely share that documentary when it is finished.
In the meantime, here are some fun photos of the evening!
Some set up and decoration pictures: Some fun pictures with our backdrop: With the Mayor, giving The DEANA Foundation two thumbs up!
So grateful for all of these amazing volunteers!
Welcoming guests to the Memory Masquerade.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 19, 2017>
Why does obtaining help have to be so difficult?
If there's one thing I've learned from this disease, it is that our medical care system is majorly flawed.
A couple of years ago, Senate (NOT doctors and medical teams) revised Medicare guidelines for receiving hospice with certain diseases.
It used to be that if a person diagnosed with dementia reached the point where they were having trouble swallowing and were losing weight due to that (and decreased eating), they could be labeled as "failure to thrive" and receive hospice care.
Under new guidelines, Alzheimer's patients can receive hospice under those conditions, but other dementia patients cannot.
The problem is, they fail to recognize that dementia is a terminal illness.
Anyone who says that it is not is not educated on the disease.
When the brain loses function to the point where it cannot tell the body how to swallow or how to process food or how to ward off infections, the consequences are terminal.
And such is the way with dementia.
Mom is now into the phase of swallowing difficulties and weight loss.
From September to April, she has lost approximately 50 pounds and has lost another 10 pounds since April.
Her eating habits have continued to change, even within the past few weeks.
The amount that she has been eating has continually decreased.
She went from eating whole sandwiches to eating only half and over the past few months we've decreased her portion size to 1/4 sandwich sizes because she wasn't finishing much more than that.
Even though she was eating frequently, she was only eating 1/4 portions at a time.
Yet, she was finishing them.
Over the past few weeks, she has decreased her portion size to mere bites of that quarter-sized sandwich.
Sometimes, she will point to the bread and pb&j;, watch us make it, and then get up and walk away from the table.
Other times, she will get her plate from the cupboard, place it on the table (her signal that she is ready for another sandwich) and walk away.
It is as if she is simply going through the routine of doing something (making the sandwich) but is forgetting about the actual eating part of it.
We've been tracking her intake of food and water.
Last summer she was eating, on average, about 5-7 sandwiches a day, plus drinking 2 ensures and at least 32 oz.
of water.
Now, she is down to only 16-20 oz.
of water a day, no ensures and an average of 2-3 sandwiches per day.
When I sit back and reflect on that significant change over the past year and witness the weekly and even daily changes, it leads me to believe that she won't last another year.
In addition to the drastic decrease in eating and weight, swallowing is becoming more and more of an issue.
Most times that she drinks her water, she chokes on it, sometimes to the point where she coughs/spits out everything in her mouth.
This puts her at risk for aspiration, which leads to pneumonia.
She has been choking on her pills over the past month to the point that we've had to eliminate all unnecessary pills (my dad has been giving her lots of vitamins to keep her healthy, but they are too much trouble now to swallow).
With her sleep medication, my dad has been crushing it up and slipping it into her nighttime sandwich.
She seems to do better swallowing the sandwich than the pills.
The trick now is getting her to finish the sandwich!
At the prompting of several people in my online support group, I called and ordered Mom a hospice evaluation (I actually emailed her doctor who sent in the referral).
Many people said they were able to receive this service for their loved one by this point and even had them receiving hospice for a year or two!
Receiving hospice can be helpful because they pay for all medications, diapers, medical supplies, etc., plus they'd have medical staff come in to check on Mom and help with the bathing.
I thought it might be nice to get some extra help and support for my dad.
I don't know if it's fortunate or unfortunate that she didn't qualify, but I'm leaning towards unfortunate simply because of the fact that this is a service she would've been able to receive at this point if her diagnosis were Alzheimer's or if they hadn't have changed the guidelines.
Basically, the hospice nurse told me at our assessment that they wouldn't be able to step in until Mom becomes non-ambulatory (not walking).
The crazy part is that with Mom's specific diagnosis and all other factors (her young age, overall good health), she could very likely be walking up until a few days before she passes away; that's what we're hoping for-we don't want to see her bedridden for months on end.
It doesn't matter if she has not eaten or drank in 5 days, they will not step in until she's bedridden.
To put this into perspective, I recently had a conversation with another young lady from my support group whose mother passed away last month.
Like my mom, her eating decreased more and more each week until one day, she decided she was done eating altogether.
From that day, it took 11 days until she passed on, and she was ambulatory until 2 days prior to her passing.
The hospice nurse also told me of a family she had assessed in a similar situation where the patient hadn't eaten in 5 days, yet couldn't qualify for hospice yet because she was still ambulatory.
So basically, this isn't a service that we will likely receive until we are days away from death.
To add more insult to injury, we were told that Medicare wants to see us place her before we can tap into anymore services.
See, while we didn't qualify for hospice, we did qualify for a home health nurse to come and assess Mom.
Things were looking up when the nurse told us Mom would qualify for in-home help!
She originally said that Medicare should provide a caregiver to come 3 days a week for several hours to help with mom, including help with the bathing (which I've been handling for the past 2 years).
After trying but failing to not get my hopes up, it turned out that she only qualified for bathing help.
Still, we were happy and relieved to get some outside help especially with the summer approaching.
Unfortunately, that was also too good to be true.
Despite the recommendation from the nurse, Medicare only approved 3 weeks of help with the bathing; I'm not sure what the point of that was!
On Friday, the nurse came by to reassess and close out Mom's case.
Until she ends up with an infection, in the hospital for some reason, or becomes non-ambulatory, our help is done.
UNLESS we decide to place her in a facility; if we do that then we'll get extra help.
Apparently the people sitting behind the computers are better equipped to tell us where Mom would be better off and will only offer help if we do it their way.
No thank you.
It's not anybody's business to tell us how to take care of Mom, least of all those who don't know her!
I really don't mind bathing Mom.
In fact, I felt a little guilty for those 3 weeks to allow someone else to do it.
I feel like it's my job to take care of her.
I will admit that it's not always easy or convenient, especially during the summer with the trips we have planned and the time I want to spend with my kids.
Through this ordeal, a couple of our caregivers have stepped up and offered to help with the bathing.
I still plan to be here when I can to help with that process, but it's nice to have peace of mind in knowing that she'll be taken care of when I'm unable to be here without placing the extra responsibility on my dad-he has enough to worry about!
Even though I am extremely frustrated with the lack of care in our system, I feel extremely blessed to have the help that we do have.
This isn't going to last forever, so we are all just doing our best to keep Mom happy and healthy for the time she has left with us. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 16, 2017>
Dear Mom, This time of year is always a little tough for me.
On Sunday, we celebrated Mother's Day and a few days before that, your birthday.
You've made it another year, 56 years old!
For some reason, it hit me a little harder this year.
As I wrote your birthday post on Facebook, the tears slid down my cheeks, just a few at first and then as if a dam had burst as I was overcome with my grief.
People tell me that I am strong, but there are moments (like that one) when I'm not so sure that is true.
I posted a beautiful picture of you with my Aubrey (taken on her first birthday) and so many thoughts and emotions surged through me.
So many things that I wish I could say to you and share with you.
Sometimes I talk to you anyway.
I know you don't understand, but still, I tell you about the kids' accomplishments, things that are going on in our lives.
I suppose it's more of a comfort for me to feel like I can still tell you what is happening.
And so I write you this letter with the things that have been in my heart over the past week.
Looking at that picture reminded me of the deep love and devotion you had for your grandchildren.
Sometimes I can't help but to daydream about what life would be like if you were still here with us, free of this disease.
I imagine the family dinners, the family trips and vacations that we would have.
I imagine the holidays and all of the festivities and traditions that make them so special.
I imagine shopping trips and mother/daughter days out.
I imagine you sitting with us on opening night of Aubrey's theatre shows, or her voice recitals, or the boys' ball games.
No doubt you would be so proud of the accomplishments of all of your grandchildren.
This birthday we wanted to celebrate you, even if you didn't understand.
Jeff called me from work and offered to pick up dinner from Miguel's in your honor, since it was your favorite place to eat!
We took our dinner over to your house and ate and reminisced about the birthdays spent at Miguel's.
When you came into the room, we all sang "Happy Birthday" to you and the grandkids showered you with affection.
I had a faint hope that the song might spark some recognition with you.
I don't know that it did, but you did get that cute grin on your face that you sometimes get when anyone tries to hug you.
There is nothing left I can give to you but my love.
For your gift this year, I decided to make your famous English Toffee to sell and raise money for your caregiving fund.
I was blown away by the love and support from friends and family.
Over 100 pounds of toffee was ordered!!
We spent all week working on filling those orders-Jeff, dad and a few friends from church all pitched in to make this happen.
You would be so proud of Dad; he's become quite the accomplished toffee maker!!
It was such a sweet thing to be making your toffee recipe, keeping your legacy alive while doing this act of service for you.
Though 100 pounds of toffee seemed a bit daunting at times, I never felt anything but love while I worked.
This was my gift to you.
Some people ordered just to show support (some continue to order because they've become addicted to your recipe!
Ha ha).
Some friends gave donations to your caregiving fund without ordering toffee at all.
Other friends left large tips to go towards your caregiving expenses (one dear friend of yours left me with a $180 tip!!)
Through all of the ordering and the cooking and the tipping, I began to realize how much you have affected other people's lives.
I think you would be truly touched to see the outpouring of love and support of your friends, family and church family.
Your journey has even touched those who have never had the honor of meeting you personally.
If I could bring you back for just one minute and tell you just one thing on this birthday, I would tell you just how much YOU ARE LOVED.
You are loved by so many people.
I love you, Mom.
Not a day goes by that I don't miss you.
That ache in my heart will never go away.
I will put on my brave face for you.
I will continue to fight for you and to care for you, as best as I am able.
I will forever hold the faith and hope in my heart that we will be reunited again someday.
Happy Birthday and Happy Mother's Day.
I love you more than you know.
Your devoted daughter,  Cassandra
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 24, 2017>
Last summer, Mom experienced a significant decline and it got me a little bit worried.
With every rapid decline, I can't help but to wonder if this is the turn that is going to lead us to that final stage.
I could write all the details of what transpired, about our evaluation for hospice and home health care, but it's a long and exhausting story.
To sum it all up in a nutshell, some members of my support group suggested that we get her a hospice evaluation claiming that their loved one received hospice much sooner than the phase my mom was in at that time.
I kind of got my hopes up; not because I wanted hospice necessarily but because I thought we might actually be able to get some (free) outside help.
Well, after the evaluation, it was determined that she was not eligible for hospice yet, even though she did fit some of the criteria.
One of the biggest factors, they told me, was weight loss.
Significant weight loss indicates that their eating habits are changing; at the end stages of the disease, weight loss will occur, signaling the advancement of the disease.
This left me a little confused.
For one thing, in everything I've read up about semantic dementia, it says that weight gain is very common in the late stages of the disease.
Mom was at her all time heaviest weight, weighing in at 234 pounds.
Her average weight (at nearly 5'8") has always been somewhere between 150-160 lbs.
Nevertheless, Mom's eating habits were changing.
Some days she'd eat hardly anything at all; other days she would devour 6 or 7 pb&j; sandwiches.
She was still drinking Ensure though, which is packed full of calories.
The hospice nurse recommended that we keep track of her weight and her eating, stating that we could call back for a reevaluation at any time, and especially if we could show changes in her eating patterns and weight loss.
So, for the next few months, we kept a log of the times and the quantities of Mom's meals.
After a couple months of doing this, we didn't really see much of a decline (especially in weight) so we decided to quit tracking for a while.
The last time I weighed her was early fall and not much had changed.
BUT, since that time, Mom has quit drinking her Ensures.
Dad has left them out for her on the counter and has even tried personally giving them to her, but she won't drink them.
She will only drink water from a plastic water bottle and she is now on a 100% pb&j; sandwich diet.
We generally only make 1/4 of a sandwich for her at a time because so much of the sandwich ended up going to waste.
She was taking one or two bites and disposing of the rest and she will not eat leftovers.
She has to watch it being made if she's going to eat it!
I've noticed her slimming down a little bit over the past few months, so today I decided that I should get her on the scale-just to note the changes.
Our caregiver was at the house with me when I showered her so she helped me to get Mom on the scale afterwards.
This is no easy feat; Danielle had to pick up her feet and move them onto the scale while I held onto her upper body.
I was shocked when I read the scale.
In fact, we put her back on two more times just so I could make sure that we read the number right and that it wasn't a mistake.
All 3 times, her weight came in right around 183 pounds; 50 pounds less than she weighed in the fall!
I am understanding more now about the weight gain/weight loss issue in the last phases of the disease.
While those with semantic dementia do tend to gain weight in the later stages of the disease, there is an order to that very final stage that I am finally starting to comprehend.
As one enters into the very last stage, there comes a disconnect between body and mind.
The body forgets how to eat, how to swallow, how to walk, how to talk, how to hold in human waste.
We've seen some of these changes already, but we still have a ways to go.
I do think it's time to start tracking her weight again.
It's possible we could now get her qualified for hospice, although she could still have a long way to go-there's no way to know for certain how long this phase will last.
When she begins to have more trouble with her mobility or complications with infections (pneumonia, UTI's), etc., then I think an evaluation will be in order.
Until then, we take it one day at a time.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 17, 2017>
Lately, Mom has a bit of a shoe fetish.
When she was in moderate stages of the disease, she used to be OCD about laying out her clothes for the following day, shoes and socks included.
She'd also place her pajamas on the footstool that sat in the corner of her bathroom/vanity area.
The obsession has continued, even though she no longer changes her clothes by herself anymore.
I think it's just the motion of doing it; she remembers that she has to put clothes in the corner but she doesn't remember why she does it.
The thing is, Mom is not only laying out her own clothes and shoes.
She collects dad's shoes and whatever shoes she can find throughout the house and puts them in her corner.
There have been several occasions where my, or other family member's shoes, have gone missing.
When that happens, we know the first place to look: Mom's corner.
And sure enough, that's where we find them!
One day, not long ago, I actually had to hide my shoes because she kept coming out to the living room to retrieve them and take them back to her room!
It gives us all a good chuckle.
Sometimes, Mom will actually attempt to wear the shoes she collects.
Last week, I heard heels clacking down the hallway as Mom made her way out of her bedroom.
The sound made me raise my eyebrows and I laughed out loud when she made her grand entrance wearing my dad's church shoes.
Sometimes, with all the sadness that dementia brings, you've gotta find things to laugh at.
I know as we look back on memories with Mom, her shoe fetish will always give us a good chuckle!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 20, 2017>
I've always tried to be very open with our journey on this blog, sharing every part of it; the good, the bad, the ugly.
The other day I realized that I have been holding back a big part of my journey with dementia.
Why am I doing this?
I don't really know, but I suppose a big part of it is fear; mostly fear of what people think.
I have mentioned The DEANA Foundation on here before, but I don't mention it often.
I think a big part of that is because I don't want to come off as though I'm trying to advertise or "sell" something to my readers; that isn't my intent with this blog.
With that said, the foundation has become a huge part of my life and a big chunk of this journey and I feel that I'm not being authentic by holding back and not talking about it.
The truth is, I spend a portion of nearly everyday contributing something to the foundation, whether it's phone calling, making presentations around the community, working out details on events, etc.
Some days, I feel like I am crazy to have started all of this while in the midst of caring for my mother and my young family.
There are moments when I question myself if this is what I should be doing and focusing on.
There are moments when I feel very inadequate, like I am a tiny fish in a giant pond.
There are moments when I want to throw in the towel and quit (not gonna lie).
Yet, there are other moments when I feel like I was definitely meant to carry out this work, especially when we are able to award grants to help families that have nowhere else to go.
It gives me a positive direction to channel my emotions and it is a way of honoring my mom.
While at these events, I'm able to talk about her, talk about what we've been through while trying to make a change within a broken system.
I feel that in some small way I am making (or attempting to make) lemonade out of the lemons we've been given.
That is becoming my new mantra for life: making lemonade out of lemons!
For those who aren't up to speed on The DEANA Foundation, you can visit our website to learn more, but basically our goal is to raise money to help middle-class families (since they are the ones always left behind) with caregiving costs associated with dementia.
We do this through donations, fundraising and hosting events.To date, we have been able to help 3 families in our community with our grant program.
We have done so much over the past couple of years and have many great things in the works right now, so I'm optimistic that number will continue to increase each year.
Right now, we are planning our first annual Gala fundraiser, which we've given the theme of "Memory Masquerade".
The goal is to raise money for the foundation, which we award as grants to families who need help.
This will be our biggest event so far and is going to be a beautiful evening; our guests will get dressed up and enjoy a nice, catered dinner.
We will have a photographer there taking photos and we are having a silent auction, which we've gotten some amazing items donated for (including a helicopter ride, an autographed copy of Kimberly Williams-Paisley's book as well as an autographed copy of "Still Alice", lunch with the Mayor, themed gift baskets...just to name a few of many fabulous things we are auctioning off...and the donations are still rolling in!).
We'll have some entertainers throughout dinner and a guest speaker is coming from The Alzheimer's Association.
We are also planning a very special tribute for those affected by dementia.
I don't want to spoil the surprise of everything we are doing, but we are making some lovely, meaningful keepsakes for caregivers to take home and will also have a special presentation dedicated to all of those affected.
Given the fact that this foundation wouldn't exist were it not for my mom, we are paying her a special tribute as well, which gives meaning to me and my family on all that we are doing.
I'm really excited about the evening but if I'm being honest it has brought a bit of anxiety as well.
For one thing, it's been a lot of work and at times it is overwhelming.
It consumes my thoughts and I'm constantly second guessing myself.
For another, I'm so afraid of failing.
With all of the hours that I and my volunteers have put into this so far, and all of the emotion and energy and focus we have given- I don't want it all to be in vain.
Nevertheless, I am optimistic that the evening will be a success and that this work will move forward!
When I sit back and look at what we've been able to accomplish this far, I am proud of our work and feel motivated to keep pushing along, hard as it may sometimes be.
Even though I don't speak of it often on this blog, know that the foundation is still plugging along!
It grows stronger with each passing year and I feel like we are finally gaining momentum and heading in the right direction.
To view our gala information, you can view our website or click here for our Facebook event page. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 7, 2017>
Today marks exactly 5 years since my dad took mom to UCLA and received the dreaded diagnosis: semantic dementia.
I remember it like it was yesterday; the tears in my dad's eyes as he delivered the news that night while standing in his kitchen.
The struggle to understand and come to terms with what the diagnosis meant.
The grief, the anger, the acceptance (still working on that one).
The course of my and my family's life was altered drastically that day.
The past 5 years have brought about the greatest heartbreak and deepest challenges of my life.
Yet, I know that the worst is still to come.
Five years ago, I wouldn't have guessed that Mom would still be with us today.
According to the pamphlet that UCLA sent home, the average duration of FTD is around 7 years (at a follow-up appointment, the UCLA doctor told us the average for semantic dementia is 12 years, though it's different for everyone).
Although it's hard to know exactly when this all started for Mom, we can trace signs back as far as 2007.
By late 2009, we knew there was definitely a problem.
That means that, while it's been 5 years since diagnosis, Mom has been dealing with this disease for 8-10 years now.
At this point, she is in the later phases of the disease, nearing the last stage but not quite there yet.
Cognitively, she is very late stage, but the final phase brings about a disconnect between body and mind; the mind stops telling the body what to do (walking, talking, swallowing, eating, etc).
Mom is still ambulatory (mobile) but I believe we are starting to see swallowing issues now.
I would say that a majority of the time that she eats and drinks her water, she ends up coughing on the water.
She isn't completely chewing her food either.
Sometimes when she coughs, she will spit out chunks of her sandwich.
A few times, she has coughed so hard that she's thrown up and we've seen the same issue with her partially chewed food.
Other times, remnants of her food remain in her mouth and she doesn't swallow it all.
Luckily, all she eats is pb&j; and that is pretty soft going down and dissolves after being in her mouth for a while.
If she were eating meats or vegetables this would be much more problematic.
If I'm just being completely honest here, it's a blessing and a curse (maybe curse is too strong of a word) that she is still here with us, 5 years later.
It's a blessing because we've had time to make preparations and process what is to come-although I don't know if I will ever be fully prepared for "the end".
It's a blessing to be able to serve her and care for her, even though she may not understand it now; it is a growing and learning experience for all of us.
This has stretched me in ways that I didn't know I could be stretched.
It's a blessing because she is still here physically to hug and love on (even though she pushes us away, lol), to say I love you to, to remember.
I think one of the things I fear when she's gone is that people will just forget her.
The hard part with this disease dragging on is watching her suffer and lose all quality of life, watching her forget everyone around her, watching the tears as she struggles.
It's hard to see my dad go through this; I know he struggles but he handles it like a champ.
He doesn't ever complain about her, even when he's up 20 times a night with her (no joke!)
In fact, just last night we were talking on the phone and he told me that if she wants to get up 10 times a night and fix sandwiches or look out the front door, he'll get up with her 10 times a night and he will re-tuck her into bed just as many times.
"One day I will miss it," he told me.
His strength, love and dedication is a great lesson to me (it brings tears to my eyes just thinking about it).
[He is probably going to be embarrassed that I write this, he is very humble and doesn't see himself as the inspiration that others do].
Five years goes by in a blink.
I'm fairly certain that we don't have another five years with her; I'd be surprised if we have two (although I never thought we'd make it this long!)
But as long as she is here, I will continue to love her and care for her to the best of my ability.
Like my dad said, one day we'll miss this.
Below are pictures of her progression, from before diagnosis and then from 2010-2016.
Before diagnosis 2010- right around the time when we knew something was wrong and were seeking answers 2011-a year before diagnosis 2012- her birthday, the year she was diagnosed 2013-our last family camping trip 2014-the year of dark make-up and (later) the blue eyebrows 2015-the best picture I could get for Mother's Day 2016-taken last Mother's Day Not quite 2017, but close enough (taken at Thanksgiving)
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 20, 2017>
One question I get frequently is, "How is your mom's progression?
Does it seem to be a consistent downward slope or does it plateau before going down again?"
I used to think she was traveling a continual downhill slope; her progression seems fast at times.
Six months ago she definitely seemed to take a quick turn downhill.
Practically overnight, we had to transition her to diapers full-time due to the daily accidents she was having.
She was eating less, sometimes going hours at times without fixing herself a sandwich.
She even had a couple of incidences where my dad found her on the floor, unable to get up on her own.
I thought the worst was quickly approaching and I had a terrible pit in my stomach for what was lurking around the corner.
However, things seemed to have plateaued since then.
There have still been slight declines in almost every area, but not the full downhill slide that I was expecting.
In fact, in some ways things have improved.
For example...the summer presented so many diapering and poop issues.
I won't go into detail, but suffice it to say that those issues are not arising at the moment whereas in the summer it was a frequent (and sometimes daily) occurrence.
I know it could change again tomorrow, but for now we are counting our blessings!
So here we are, at the start of 2017.
I like to give a full update each year (sometimes twice a year, if I'm really on the ball).
Comparing the last year to the present year always puts her progression into perspective.
This is what Mom's stage is looking like as of right now: LANGUAGE: The only real recognizable word is "Bud".
She attempts to say my name; it comes out as "Cuh-suh-suh-suh".
Every now and then we might pick out a familiar word, but she mostly speaks gibberish.
There are some repetitive "words" that she says daily, but we aren't really sure what those words are.
Sometimes we can figure out what she's saying by her gestures.
HYGEINE: She no longer brushes her teeth.
On occasion, she will pick up the toothbrush off the bathroom counter and swish it in her mouth for 2 seconds before briefly running it under a quick stream of water and returning it to it's place.
Her gums are very red and swollen and her teeth have seen better days.
I picked up an electric toothbrush for her about a month ago and started brushing her teeth while she's in the shower; she doesn't remember to spit out the toothpaste.
She cries the entire time I'm brushing, so I try to keep it brief.
I'm not sure how much difference it's really making at this point, but at least we can say we've tried.
When it comes to brushing her hair, she used to allow me to brush it for her while she pat her face with a make-up sponge (going through the motions of putting on her daily make-up).
She no longer makes an effort to put on make-up and won't stand still long enough for me to brush her hair.
I usually follow her to her bed after she's clothed from her shower and try to quickly brush her hair before she swats my hand away and lays down.
The other day I was able to cut her hair again (it had to be done quickly, in the one minute that she sat down to eat her pb&j;) and the shorter length does help with the hair washing and brushing.
BATHING: She does not participate in any of her own bathing.
Six months ago she would hold out her hand and at least rub the shampoo onto her hair.
She might do that every once in a while, but for the most part shower time consists of me getting her in the shower and her fighting me to turn off the water the entire time.
Sometimes I try to sing to her and distract her a little bit; if I'm lucky she'll give me a grin but she really hates being in the shower these days.
We have a system: I rinse her down, she turns off the water so I then wash her down with soap (while she tries to get to the towel on the other side of the glass).
I then turn the water back on.
I rinse her off, she turns off the water and then I quickly get in to brush her teeth, followed by one last rinse off.
The whole while she is usually crying; this is relatively new.
She really hates showering.
I always feel so bad when she starts crying, but it has to be done.
When I'm finished, I then pass her a towel but she doesn't dry herself off.
She grabs the towel and then attempts to put it on the floor to stand on (despite the fact that I already have a towel laid down on the floor for her).
I dry her off, top to bottom, and I get her clothes on her.
She will hold up her arms for her shirt and help pull up her pants.
TOILETING: Mom is in diapers full-time, mainly because we never know when she's going to end up wet.
She does use the toilet still, interestingly enough.
But she usually wakes up with a full diaper in the morning and is wet by the end of the day.
EATING: Mom's been on her pb&j; kick for quite some time now.
The most significant change within the past 6 months in terms of her eating is that she longer drinks her Ensure.
Now she is on a 100% pb&j; diet.
My dad gives her vitamins with her meds and she only drinks water.
ROUTINE: I remember when her routines were such a headache for us because we could never get her to stray away from it; she was so rigid and so unflexible.
She wouldn't even take a pill one minute too soon!
She no longer has a schedule but she has a routine of sorts and it usually runs in 20 minute cycles.
All day long, she makes a circle from her bedroom to the kitchen to make a pb&j; sandwich, to tapping her plastic medicine dish on the counter for medicine, to banging on the front screen door to get out, to looking out the window, to going back to her room to lay down.
As she makes her way down the hallway, she tries opening every door along the way.
We've had to add baby locks on the bathroom door (because she was getting into the soaps and rubbing them on her face) and dad now locks the office because she was pounding on the computer keyboard, which was messing up the computer.
Once she lays down, we may get a 5 minute break (sometimes longer if we're lucky!)
and then the cycle starts again.
If the weather is nice and we are able to take her outside, it helps to settle her down as she sits on the patio and watches every passerby.
We've had a lot of rain this winter, so she hasn't been outside much which has added to her stir-craziness.
She rarely tries to go for walks anymore and she doesn't ask to go to Ellen's (this is all new within the past 6 months), although I suspect she might be trying to ask to go to her sister's house; it's too hard to understand anymore.
Since she wants to make pb&j; constantly (and usually only takes 1-2 bites out of each sandwich she fixes), we cut the bread into quarters for her now to cut down on waste.
If her dish banging becomes too much to handle, we slip some Jelly Belly jelly beans into the dish and she swallows them as if they are medicine.
So I guess I lied when I said she's on a 100% pb&j; diet...she gets those jelly beans in there ;) She does wind down at night, but still gets up several times during the night and goes about her routine, which makes for lack of sleep for my dad.
But he never complains about it.
He just does what he has to do (and I have no idea how he does it!)
There you have my bi-annual report on mom and her progression.
Like I said, she has, for the most part, plateaued over the past 6 months.
But things don't last for very long with dementia.
The scary part is thinking about what the next downhill slope will bring.
She is so advanced in the disease that the next big hurdles to face are issues with choking and swallowing, mobility, complete incontinence and muteness.
I wish that she'd never have to go through any of that.
Every decline breaks my heart more and more.
:( Here are a couple of recent photos of mom, taken on Christmas.
It was a Christmas miracle that we got her looking (and even smiling!)
in the direction of the camera!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 21, 2016>
The other night, as my husband and I were laying in bed, I asked him the question: "If I end up with dementia, would you take care of me or would you put me in a facility?"
There have been many thoughts and observations that led up to me asking him that question.
I've been thinking about my mom a lot, reflecting on the last few years with her, wondering if I may inherit the same fate.
Sometimes it feels like she is disappearing from the world; like she's the invisible woman that only I and my close family can see.
Every now and then this discussion comes up with my dad as we reflect on those who have and have not been there for us in this journey.
The fact about dementia is that it is a very lonely disease.
It isn't like other terminal illnesses where you are given an approximate amount of time to tie up your affairs and say your good-byes (and doing so while still in your right mind).
Rather, it is unknown and most often very long and drawn out.
In the beginning, people are shocked with the diagnosis; they express their love and condolences.
But as time wears on, people (understandably) go about their lives and lose interest.
The person with dementia is left alone to lose their mind and memories and abilities, day by lonely day.
We've been very fortunate to have many family and friends step up to comfort us and help ease to our burden throughout this journey.
When Mom was initially diagnosed, there were many who expressed their condolences.
We had offers of caregiving help-physically and even financially.
But there's a huge difference between talk and action.
With as many people who have reached out to us, there are equally as many who have rarely acknowledged the situation.
People that my mom have worked with or served with at church; women, who at one time or another my mom has considered to be very close and dear friends, who have never once visited her since her diagnosis or even call to ask how she's doing (the same goes for my dad).
There are family members as well who rarely, and some who never, stop by; family members who my mom was very close to, who never pick up the phone to call my dad and ask how she, or even how HE, is doing.
Life goes on, and it has to.
Everyone has their own struggles to face in life.
We understand that, but it's lonely all the same.
And I would be lying if I didn't say that it's been hurtful that certain people haven't called or visited over the past 5 years.
When we think of the life that Mom led, loving and serving and giving to others, it's sad to feel as if she's been forgotten about that easily; that maybe she didn't mean as much to people as they meant to her.
And maybe that's the not the way it really is.
Maybe she's not really forgotten.
Everyone handles grief differently.
Sometimes people don't know what to say or how to react.
Many may feel that she doesn't know them anyway, so there is little purpose in visiting (though the visits didn't happen even when she did still remember certain friends and family members).
I've been very transparent in sharing our journey so maybe some of these people read my blog, unbeknownst to me, and feel that they already know what's going on.
It's a hard situation all the way around.
A couple of years ago, I had somebody close to me go over a couple of times to sit with mom.
She was friends with mom but I wouldn't say she was super close to her; she was much closer to me.
After the second time, she told me, "I just can't handle seeing your mom like this, so I won't be going over anymore."
That comment left me feeling so angry and hurt and alone.
As hard as she claims it was for her, imagine what the pain must be for my dad to see his sweetheart decline every single day.
Imagine how hard it is for my mom's children to watch this disease take her over and transform her into a stranger; how hard it is for us to change roles as we bathe her, change her, care for her; how hard it is for our kids to lose their grandma.
I don't think this person intended to hurt my feelings at all.
But since that day I can't recall a time she's asked how my mom is doing (though I occasionally volunteer information) and our relationship hasn't been the same.
I feel abandoned.
The avoidance from friends and family members does cause pain; not just to me, but to my dad as well.
I don't write this post to guilt or shame anyone, but rather to help people to understand what every dementia caregiver goes through.
There is a common theme in many of my online support groups and that is the feeling of being alone, especially for the main caregiver (most often the spouse; in this situation, my dad).
I share this for those who may wonder how you can help ease someone's burden; I give the following suggestions: 1.
Don't avoid.
This is our reality EVERY.
SINGLE.
DAY.
Please don't pretend like it's not happening.
Don't be afraid to ask how someone is doing-both the person affected and the caregiver.
I always feel really grateful when people ask how my dad is doing because they recognize that this is just as much a struggle (if not more) for him than for my mom.
You don't have to talk about it every single time you interact with the person, but don't be afraid to check in now and then.
You aren't going to offend or upset a caregiver by talking about it!
2.
Absolutely, do not say or offer anything that you don't mean!
We've all heard it: "Let me know if there's anything I can do to help" and then when called upon for help, there's no response.
I think that's worse than not saying or doing anything at all.
It's happened to every caregiver out there.
If you are serious about wanting to help, it's more helpful to give specific suggestions of what you can do.
Sometimes you may not know what to do, and that's okay!
Just don't offer anything if there is no intention of following through.
3.
Give a phone call or a visit now and then.
Even a note or a card in the mail can brighten up a caregiver's day.
I know it seems intimidating, but it is appreciated and shows that you really care.
I know it means a lot to my dad when people have dropped off treats or sent cards, or even called to check in on how they're both doing.
Additionally, keep in mind that people who care for loved ones at home have little social outlets.
It's nice, sometimes, to have interaction with other people.
It can get really lonely.
4.
Be mindful that caregiving is a 24/7 job.
A lot of times, people will call and ask my dad for help with something, and he's not one to say no.
He always makes time to help people.
And truthfully I think sometimes he likes it because it gives him another outlet to interact with people.
But...people may not give thought that in order for him to go out with them or to go over and help, that means he has to have a caregiver at home that he is paying (or one of us has to come over and sit with mom).
It's nice for a caregiver to be able to get out; maybe help provide a way so that they can get out now and then!
5.
Don't be afraid to recognize special days: birthdays, anniversaries, etc.
I have heard from many caregivers who feel sad when people close to them fail to recognize these special days.
Perhaps they feel it will upset them to say anything; not bringing it up doesn't make us forget about that day.
Be mindful that holidays are going to feel especially sad and lonely, especially while still caregiving as the person is still here to care for.
We are grieving for the loss of someone who is still alive and unless you've been through this, it's difficult to describe the many emotions that go with it.
Before I end this post, and because I don't want to come off as ungrateful, I want to be sure to recognize that we have been luckier than so many other caregivers out there.
Though it hurts with the people who have seemingly deserted us, there are so many who have been and continue to be here for us and for that we are sincerely grateful.
Sometimes it's even been strangers, or friends who never even knew my mom before dementia, who have shown us incredible support!
Those people have truly lightened the load and I can't tell you how much we love you for being there for us. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 2, 2016>
We had quite an eventful day last Sunday.
Okay, the picture of the firetruck may be over dramatic, but I got your attention ;) (The firetruck DID make an appearance).
Let me start by reminding you of Mom's obsession with her jewelry.
She no longer attempts make-up, but she still makes sure her earrings are in her ears and her wedding ring is on her finger.
Except that it's not really her wedding ring.
She dropped her real wedding ring in the driveway a couple of years ago (thankfully we found it and locked it away!)
Since then, we've put a "cheap" ring on her finger.
It was an adjustable flower ring that belonged to her mother.
Over time, the rhinestones have all fallen out and the metal has discolored.
Over the summer, when Dad went on a cruise with his sisters, he picked out a silver, stainless steel ring for mom to wear as her wedding ring.
I thought the gesture was SO sweet; Mom was just content to have a ring on her finger and it fit her perfectly.
Fast forward a few months...Mom has been dealing with some swelling, mostly in her ankles.
I bathe her 3 times a week and I haven't noticed any problem with her ring.
On occasion, I will move it around and make sure everything is okay but apparently it's been a while since I've checked.
Our caregiver texted me on Saturday to say that she noticed Mom's finger looked irritated underneath the ring and that it appeared to be stuck.
The next day (Sunday), while family gathered for dinner, I looked at Mom's finger.
Her finger was so swollen that I couldn't move the ring at all.
My Aunt Peggy and I got some olive oil and attempted to remove the ring from her finger.
But...it wouldn't come off.
We tried and tried and could only manage to move it just beneath her knuckle.
With the ring slightly moved, we were able to get a good look at the red ring that her metal one had left behind on her skin.
It looked raw and very sore; the ring needed to come off and soon.
But now we had a big problem: how do we get this ring off of Mom's finger??
The ring was so tight that we couldn't get a tool under there ourselves to cut it off.
And with her lack of comprehension, many things could go wrong.
As we were all brainstorming, I wondered if we could call a non-emergency line and get a paramedic to come out and cut it off.
After some discussion, my husband called the fire department who said that they could, in fact, come over and cut the ring off her finger with a special tool.
Twenty minutes later, three firemen walked through the living room door and attempted to get the ring off Mom's finger as my dad, Aunt Peggy and I held Mom still.
Mom nervously tapped her foot while she giggled; Aunt Peggy thinks she was giggling because of the firemen, but Mom giggles nervously when people are in her space and trying to hold her still.
But who knows, maybe she was checking them out.
Ha ha.
Did I mention that her ring was stainless steel?
Note to self, stainless steel is almost indestructible!
Her tough ring was barely scratched at the attempts of their special tool.
Apparently it only works on soft metals.
They gave it their best and then decided that this tool was not cut for the job.
They had a saw that would work, but decided it was too risky because of her agitation and inability to hold still.
They told us to take her into Urgent Care or the ER where they had the ability to sedate her through the process.
I hate ER with a passion (none of us wanted to go that route) so I called Urgent Care first.
They told me that they didn't have the right tools to do it, so we were left with no choice but to take her to the ER.
By that time, my Aunt Sharon (who is an ICU nurse) had arrived on scene for family dinner.
Before taking her to the ER, we decided to give it one last try.
Aunt Sharon held Mom's hand in a bowl of ice water, hoping to get the swelling down.
Unfortunately, that made no difference and it was more difficult to try and keep her hand in the water.
So...off to the ER we went.
We sat Mom inbetween my dad and me in the backseat of Aunt Sharon's car while we made the drive across town.
Aunt Sharon and Aunt Peggy came for moral support.
At the ER, my dad went to check Mom in, while Aunt Peggy went to get a wheelchair and I held onto Mom in the backseat of the car.
We use the wheelchair for doctor's visits not because she can't walk, but because she can't follow instruction and she will either refuse to walk or walk in the wrong direction.
It's easier to sit her down and push her where we need to go.
We transitioned Mom to the wheelchair and to make a very long and boring story short, we waited in the ER for about an hour and a half before she was finally seen by the doctor.
My Aunts took turns pushing her around the waiting room in her wheelchair for the entire waiting time in an effort to keep her from getting out of the chair and running away.
Thankfully, it worked and we were able to keep Mom contained and somewhat comfortable.
Once Mom was called back to a room, they would only allow my dad to back with her, despite our protests.
We tried to tell them that they would need a second person to hold her but they were insistent that only one person go back.
Quite frankly, they were rude and uncompassionate.
Of course once they got her back in the room, they sent one nurse out to get another to hold her arm (why didn't they come back for one of us??)
Medical attention, particularly ER and hospital visits are extremely frustrating when dealing with dementia because most of the medical professionals really don't know what they're dealing with; at least, that's been our experience.
At any rate, the report from my dad was that they were able to get the ring cut off without any sedation, but her ring was so strong that it broke their tool!
They had to make two cuts and remove a piece, and then pull the ring apart.
Luckily, there were no signs of infection on her finger, although it did bleed a little and was left very raw and red.
Poor Mom.
We've been keeping Neosporin on it and it seems to be healing well.
Needless to say, it was a big day for Mom, who usually spends quiet days at home or sitting on her chair in the front yard.
She threw up in the car on the way home (she tends to get car sick and it was probably too much excitement for her) but she slept pretty good that night!
I didn't hear this firsthand from my dad (so hopefully I'm accurate in relaying this) but my Aunt told me something that my dad told her after everything was over.
He told her that while they were back in the waiting room, Dad was sitting in front of Mom, holding her hand.
She looked at him and leaned forward and gave him a kiss.
What a sweet moment that must have been for my dad.
It makes me tear up just thinking about it.
Affection has been long gone but every now and then (very, very rarely), Mom will lean over and give Dad a kiss.
It reminds me that even when all seems lost, she is still somewhere in there.
My dad is her rock and the love of her life.
Even though she can't express it in words, I know that she is aware of his love and support for her.
I just know it! 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, December 1, 2016>
Another Thanksgiving has come and gone.
Mom hasn't known what holidays are for a couple of years now.
I only get to spend every other year with my family for Thanksgiving; the odd years are spent with my in-laws and the even years are with my side of the family.
It's been quite a while since I've enjoyed a real Thanksgiving with my mom.
This morning, a picture popped up in my facebook memories.
It was a picture taken of Mom and me during Thanksgiving, 2010.
While looking at that picture, I realized that this was the last real Thanksgiving I had with mom.
In 2010, we knew that something was wrong with her, but we didn't know quite what it was (despite several appointments with doctors and specialists).
Mom had come to Thanksgiving at my house that year and was finicky over the food.
My Uncle was making the turkey the "wrong way" (he was smoking it on the BBQ), she was having aversions to a lot of the foods and she messed up on making her pies.
I thought it strange at the time that her pumpkin pie had turned out runny; mom had always been a master in the kitchen.
I remember being slightly embarrassed and confused with the odd way Mom was behaving.
I feel a little ashamed of that now, but at the time I had no idea what was going on.
In hindsight, I wish I would've known that that would be our last real Thanksgiving with her.
Rather than being annoyed or embarrassed, I would have embraced every moment of the holiday.
Thinking about it now bring tears to my eyes.
I miss my mom so much.
By the next Thanksgiving turn (2012) she'd received her diagnosis and even though she still somewhat understood what Thanksgiving was, she didn't participate in any of the preparations and she didn't eat any of the food.
Thanksgiving 2014 came and went and she didn't even know what Thanksgiving was.
This time, I was a little more mentally prepared in that I had no expectations of jogging her memory in getting her to remember what the holiday is.
Those days are long gone.
Everyday seems to mesh into the next for her; there are no special days anymore.
Thanksgiving dinner was held at my parent's house, as are all holidays nowadays due to the fact that we can't get Mom to leave the house and be comfortable anywhere else.
My house is a little more ideal for family gatherings, with a big backyard and plenty of space for the kids to run around and play.
Dad's house is a little tighter quarters, but, it is what it is and we make the best of it.
There were two highlights of this Thanksgiving.
One was that Mom came into the kitchen to make her peanut butter and jelly sandwich right during dinner time, which meant that we had two minutes of her sitting down at the table with the family during our feast!
It might sound silly, but it was such a sweet thing to have her sit with us, if only but for a moment.
The second highlight was getting this snapshot of Mom with some of her grandkids.
Not all the grandkids were there that day, but I was happy to get this picture of her with the kids.
I enjoyed spending time with my family, but it's still really hard without Mom.
I often wonder if it's harder having her there physically.
It's a painful reminder of all that we are missing.
I almost made it through the entire day without any tears ;) Check back tomorrow for another post about the eventful weekend that followed Thanksgiving!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 7, 2016>
Last month I turned 35.
35!
I don't feel like I am in my mid-30's!
This means that high school graduation was half my lifetime ago-that makes me feel old!
I remember when my mom was 35; I was 15.
Here's a picture of my mom when she was 35.
I spent a lot of time reflecting throughout this birthday and a terrifying realization hit me.
When my mom was 35, she only had about ten good years left before dementia snuck in and robbed her of living.
TEN YEARS.
Of course she had NO idea that her time was limited.
This sad reality got me to thinking, what if I only have ten years left?
What would I do differently?
What are some things I want to accomplish?
What kind of legacy would I want to leave behind?
While I don't want to live my life in fear, the truth is that none of us know when our time on this earth is up.
We've been dealing with Mom's disease for quite a few years now and I can't help but to think about all of the things she has missed.
Fortunately, my parents had their family young and Mom had a few years of being a grandma (not nearly long enough); they were able to travel to places they wanted to go.
But they were just getting started.
Looking back in hindsight and knowing that, at my age, Mom's good years left were numbered has served as a reminder to me that our life and our time on this earth is precious.
It is a reminder to live life to the fullest each day; to not put off the things we want to do in our lives.
One of the biggest things that I think about is the legacy that I will someday leave behind for my children.
What kind of person do I want them to remember me as?
I am trying to set the example of service, compassion and love for them.
I know I fall short in a lot of ways, but I hope that they will remember me as someone who cared deeply for others and looked to help those in need.
I want them to know that I am a woman of faith, who loves the gospel of Jesus Christ.
I want them to know how fiercely I love them.
A couple of years ago, I started writing journals to each individual child, expressing my love, experiences with them and words of wisdom.
This is something I struggle to keep up with, but if I died tomorrow, they would know very clearly (by reading my words) how I feel about them.
When someone we love leaves this world, memories are the most precious things we are left with.
If I've learned anything on this journey, it is to make each moment count!
Memories are what I will leave behind and I hope that they're good.
Now is the time to take that trip (or, at least, start saving for it!
), to work through my fears and take risks of the things I want to accomplish, to take every moment to snuggle my kids or read them a book.
Life is too short to spend on negativity, to worry about what people think all the time, to hold a grudge.
Tomorrow isn't guaranteed but for today, I am here so I will make the best of the time I am blessed to be alive!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, September 23, 2016>
I went to a funeral this morning.
In fact, I sang at the funeral with my sister.
She was a lovely woman from our church (and the mom to one of my sister's close friends); she passed away from a stroke and she also had cancer.
As I sat there, listening to the words of affection that her children spoke, I couldn't help but to think about my mom.
And the inevitable fate that awaits us.
Since my mom's diagnosis, funerals haven't been the same for me.
I look at things differently; I know that death is lurking around the corner.
I mourn for the person whose funeral I'm attending, but I also mourn for my mom as I reflect on the emotional loss that I've gone through and anticipate the physical loss I will, in time, endure.
I can't help but to think about how my mom's funeral will be.
Will there be a lot of people in attendance?
Who will come to honor her and to support our family?
Who will give the eulogy?
Will I have to speak?
Will we laugh at the funny memories of Mom or will we be too stricken with grief to smile?
What songs will we sing?
Will I have to sing?
I can't sing at my mother's funeral.
Even if it was her request before she was sick.
(Sorry Chris-I think you're going solo).
I feel the pain that the family members are experiencing at these funerals because I am experiencing that same pain.
I have been experiencing this pain over and over for the past 4 years.
I have gone through the emotional loss of my mother, but her physical presence won't allow me to move on.
In a conversation with my sister the other day, I made a comment that I almost envy those who have lost their parent quickly in a stroke or accident.
It isn't dragging on for an indefinite amount of time as they sit back and watch someone they love deteriorate for months or years on end; they aren't constantly wondering, month after month, year after year, is this going to be it?
I'm not saying that their loss is any easier.
A loss is a loss; it's hard any way it comes.
But the heart cannot begin heal while it is still in battle.
I feel guilty for having these thoughts.
More times than not, I don't know if I am quite ready for that physical loss yet.
I don't know if I ever will be.
It will be hard and it will be another kind of pain to work through.
People will say to enjoy what time we have left; enjoy my moments with her.
I do feel comfort in hugging her, stroking her hair, telling her that I love her, but how can I say that I enjoy watching my mom struggle and lose her abilities everyday?
There is very little left of my mother.
Every now and then I may get a smile out of her, but for the most part, she hardly responds to any of my interactions with her and it is another reminder of everything I've lost.
I love my mother.
I love her and miss her so much it hurts.
I don't know that the pain will ever go away; the battle may end but the scars will remain.
But knowing that she is free from pain and from the prison of her body may be the first step to start healing from the nightmare that dementia has brought into my life.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 15, 2016>
When my kids were little, they used to get into things that they weren't supposed to.
On several occasions, each of them had gotten into my make up and rubbed it all over their faces.
I remember one time, my son got into the Desitin and rubbed it all over his cheeks.
Vaseline, baby powder, flour...those are just a few of the things they had fun with.
One of my favorites was the time that my daughter took apart her peanut butter and jelly sandwich and smeared the insides of the sandwich all over face!
My kids have long since outgrown the phase of getting into things and rubbing it on their little faces.
But my mom, on the other hand, has been obsessed with rubbing things on her face.
It stems from her make-up obsession, which you can read about in a number of previous posts.
Her routine has changed over time; she went from putting on make-up nicely, to wearing dark eyebrows and foundation so thick you could peel it off,to applying make-up in all the wrong places of her face.
She was making such a terrible mess with all of the make-up that my dad had to phase it out, leaving her with mostly empty containers in her drawer.
She no longer puts on make-up, but she does go through the motions of applying it.
After I get her dressed from her shower, for example, she will grab a tube of mascara and, without opening the lid, rub the plastic tube all over her face.
Sometimes she will dip a powder sponge onto the lid of her eyeshadow or loose powder and rub it on her face.
The motions of putting on make-up seems to be the last ritual left that she remembers, though I don't think she understands the significance of it.
She has been in the habit of rubbing something on her face, and that compulsion still lingers.
We aren't limited to make-up anymore.
It is the act of rubbing something-anything- on her face that compels mom and it doesn't matter what it is.
It used to be whatever she could find in her bathroom: toothpaste, deodorant, soap, shampoo, ky-jelly (we got a good laugh out of that one), lotion, diaper rash cream.
Dad removed everything from her bathroom in an effort to stop her from putting things on her face.
Not to be deterred, Mom recovered more items from the front bathroom: Dad's after shave, shaving gel, more soaps and shampoos.
So, we put a childproof handle on the doorknob.
Problem solved.
Except that now she opens up the peanut butter containers and rubs that on her face.
She got into the laundry room and found cleaners and laundry soap and started to put that on her face (Dad now keeps the laundry room locked).
Her newest thing has been opening up water bottles, dumping the water onto her hands and then "applying" the water to her face.
And within the past week, she has been opening up the curio cabinet, taking out a crystal bunny knick-knack, and rubbing that on her face!
Luckily, Dad is able to lock the curio cabinet; we were afraid she was going to break something!
Needless to say, the house is being childproofed all over again and Mom's skin has been red, bumpy and irritated.
A couple of weeks ago, it was so dry and red that it started to peel.
I brought over face moisturizer and we've been using that on her face twice a day.
That, and locking up everything she could possibly rub into her skin,  has helped her skin to improve.
I suppose it's only a matter of time before she loses this last sense of herself that she has been grasping onto.
It seems like just yesterday that she wore blue eyebrows, and now that is gone.
This, too, shall pass.
And when it does, it will be bittersweet.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 26, 2016>
While bathing and dressing my mom on Monday, I noticed swelling around her ankles and feet.
We've had some home assessments this summer from nurses and one of the things they always checked was her ankles.
So when I noticed the swelling, it was a red flag for me.
The swelling goes around the perimeter of her feet, but that part is minimal.
What concerned me most is that on the front part of her feet (between the ankle and center of her foot) there is a round "pocket" of swelling.
It's hard to describe, but it resembles somewhat of a golf ball, except instead of being hard to the touch, it is soft and gel-like.
As Murphy's Law would have it, a social worker from a home health company came out to the house last week, assessed mom and closed the case since physically, there is nothing wrong with her.
So I put a call in to her doctor, hoping he might call me back and discuss the swelling before we were tackled the difficult task of taking her in to the office.
I was hoping to bypass a doctor visit and instead, have a house call from a nurse again.
We have not had great communication and call backs from the doctor in the past; I was afraid I would be sitting around waiting for 3 weeks before we made contact so I decided to call the home care company and see if they could reopen the case.
Unfortunately, they said we would have to start the process all over again at ground zero (referral, assessment, etc).
Fortunately, the man I spoke with was able to call the doctor's office and received a call back quickly.
Within two hours of his call, he had an order for a home nurse to come and assess mom.
To make a long story short, the nurse came by yesterday and agreed that the swelling looked very odd, and then admitted that she'd never seen anything like it.
She said that it looked like a fatty tumor but she'd never seen it on an ankle before.
So...there wasn't much resolution to the visit, other than the nurse reporting her findings to the doctor (we're waiting to hear back from him on whether or not he wants to see her, based on the findings) and the nurse is going to put in a referral for physical therapy for Mom, due to the fact that she's had a couple of falls (and couldn't get up) over the past two months.
We'll see if that referral goes anywhere and if Mom would even mentally be able to participate in physical therapy.
In the meantime, we are waiting to hear from the doctor on whether or not we need to take her in.
Honestly, I'm not sure what he will be able to do if we took her in.
A biopsy?
Fat chance in getting her to cooperate with that.
And anesthesia isn't a risk we want to take at this point.
I know some of you reading might ask:  Could she have twisted her ankle?
It's possible, but unlikely that is the cause because it's in the same place on both ankles.
Could it be her medication?
The nurse checked the interactions of each medication and no red flags showed up.
She did start taking a new medication beginning of July (trazadone), but you would think side effects would've shown up sooner.
The only medications she takes are trazadone, Ativan, and methyl-something-with-a-long-name (a hormone to stop her menstrual cycles).
Is she drinking enough water?
She seems to be drinking at least 32 oz.
a day.
It's been the same for a long time...no sudden drop in her intake of fluids.
Is her blood pressure okay?
Last week it was slightly elevated, but she was also very agitated with the cuff around her arm.
Yesterday, it was in the normal range (110/80).
Maybe it's the socks?
My Aunt (who is a nurse) suggested it might be the socks creating a tourniquet effect.
I changed her socks right away; that was on Monday and today is Friday and there is no change.
Sooooo....I guess we wait for a call from the doctor and go from there!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 18, 2016>
Last night Mom gave us a good scare.
I was sitting on my couch with my husband around 9:00 pm, watching a TV show in my jammies and unwinding from the day.
My phone rang; it was my sister.
I answered the phone and when she hesitated for a second before answering, I had the sense that something was wrong.
Her response confirmed it, "Has Dad called you?"
she asked, a slight panic in her voice.
"No, why?
What happened?"
I asked, sitting up straight, on alert.
"Mom is missing," she replied.
I nearly jumped out of my seat, exclaiming, "What do you mean she is missing??"
My sister quickly filled me in on what had transpired.
She and her son had been at the house while Dad was looking at a job.
When they saw Dad's truck pulling into the driveway, they gathered their things to leave.
They unlocked the front door and let themselves out, but didn't lock the door behind them because Dad was getting out of his truck and coming up right then.
It didn't seem likely that Mom would get out without someone noticing or crossing paths with her.
Yet, it happened.
I jumped out of my seat and dialed my dad's number, trying to decide if I should leave the house in my jammies to go look for her or change into real clothes first (okay, let's be honest here...the issue was more about a bra than it was the jammies, ha ha).
Dad answered his phone after the first ring and I asked him if he had found Mom.
Thankfully, he said that he had found her.
I breathed a sigh of relief and tried to calm my racing heart as Dad gave his side of what happened.
Like Christina had said, he had just pulled up and Chris and Jeremy were walking down the driveway.
Somehow in that time, Mom must have snuck behind Chris and walked down alongside Dad's huge work van as he was on the other side (hiding her from his view) and made her escape.
By the time Dad had made his way up the porch, she was already gone and he had no idea that she had even step foot out of the house.
He came inside the house and got settled in when, a short time later, he heard his doorbell ring.
He answered to find a man standing there, who said, in a thick, Spanish accent, "Your wife is out."
It took Dad a moment to understand what the man was saying, but then he followed him outside and walked up and down the street, finding no sign of Mom.
Dad was a little suspicious of the man, wondering if he was trying to scam him or something, but the man told him to go check in his house.
Dad walked through the house and the panic set in when he couldn't find Mom.
He went back outside and-I can't remember if he said he walked or got in his car, but I think he said he happened to walk out at just the right time-he found Mom crossing a street in the neighborhood.
My guess from  Dad's description is that the man who showed up at the door was the husband of Mom's friend, Maria, who lives up the street.
They often see me walking with her and they always try to engage Mom and say hi; they know the situation.
Thank goodness that he happened to be outside at 9:00 at night and recognized that my mom was wandering alone.
I am so grateful for neighbors who keep an eye out for us.
I hate to think of how it could've ended had he not been out!
As I was on the phone with Dad, he found her ID bracelet that we'd had made for her a few years ago (that she would never leave on).
I told him that she is to the point now where I don't think she can get the bracelet undone.
After struggling himself with the clasp, Dad finally got the bracelet on Mom and as of this morning, when I checked in with the caregiver, it is still on her wrist.
Even with our lock system, Mom is sneaky...we never know when she might get past us!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 12, 2016>
On Monday, I returned from a 10 day family vacation.
Our friends let us borrow their RV and we drove through Utah and Idaho to visit family, attend a special event for my daughter, Maurina, and enjoy the great outdoors.
One of the best parts of this was that my dad was able to join us in his fifth wheel (travel trailer) as well!
We rarely get to vacation together these days because somebody has to be home with mom.
But it was important to Maurina (and me) that we both be there, so my sister stepped up to the plate and took care of mom while we were gone.
I'm so grateful to her and to our other caregivers for making this trip possible and taking care of mom while we were gone.
For the first time all summer, I was able to really relax and enjoy myself.
Even while I was in Arizona, I was busy answering phone calls, regarding mom, every single day.
Mom is constantly on my mind and I worry about her when I'm way.
The days leading up to vacation were filled with stress and sadness for me (I've had a hard time shaking off this "down" feeling lately) but I was determined to relax and enjoy time away with my hubby and kids.
As much as I worry, I know my dad worries even more being away, but the time away was good for both of us.
For the first time in a long time, I saw my dad happy and enjoying himself.
We talked, we laughed, we played games, we went fishing...it was almost like old times.
Except we were missing Mom.
There were moments of reminiscing, remembering the trips we used to take when Mom was well.
Sometimes I let myself daydream about what Mom would be saying or doing if she was still with us; things we did when she was with us.
I imagine her playing with the kids or taking them on walks around the campground.
I think about how she and I would've gone off to the scrapbook store while the guys were shopping at Cabela's or Camping World, like in times past.
I picture her scolding us for not wiping our feet before walking inside the trailer.
Times have changed and she is surely missed, but thankfully I was able to still have a good time and not dwell on the sadness that has been consuming me for the past few years.
I kept my mind busy fishing and paddle boarding and laughing and making memories with my children.
For the first time that I can remember, I didn't want to come home from vacation.
Usually, by the end of a long trip I'm ready to go home and sleep in my own bed and get back into a routine.
This time, I really didn't want to come back home.
It's hard to put it all into words, but coming home meant that it was back to reality; back to my routine of running here and there, of bathing Mom and watching her decline each day, wondering how much time we have left; the sadness envelopes me again.
When I was away, I felt carefree and happy.
Now, I get my daily reminder of what I've lost; what I am losing.
It's a complicated thing to grieve for someone who is still living.
I don't think it's something you can truly understand until you've experienced it firsthand.
Hard as it was to come back to reality, I was happy to see Mom again, to hug her and to kiss her and tell her that I've missed her.
But seeing her also reminds me of just how much I miss her.
This vacation was something I really needed, to refresh and reflect and to give me a new surge of energy to get through the next little bit with Mom.
Here are some pictures of our trip, for your viewing pleasure ;)
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 26, 2016>
I'm happy to report that we survived the week that Dad was on vacation without any major incidences!
I think that this trip was a big eye opener for my brother.
He insisted that we didn't need caregivers while he was there; he was working from home on his computer for the week.
I told him what we were dealing with, but until you are here to see it firsthand, I don't think you can really understand.
I think he mostly just thought he needed to be there to make sure there wasn't a fire or big emergency; much has changed since the last time he was here.
Needless to say, I had to call the caregivers back to come in and help for a couple of those days.
Natalie and I spent a lot of the day there as well, but it's difficult to keep the kids cooped up in dad's house all day (there isn't much for them to do there), especially when Joe was trying to work, so we had to get them out of the house for at least a little bit each day.
All in all, Mom was safe and taken care of and Dad was able to go and have a good time away from the stress and sadness of his daily life.
I am really grateful that I had Joe and Natalie here for the week to help out, if for nothing else than for my emotional sanity!
After dad returned, I went home with Joe and Natalie for a week.
We started this tradition a few years ago-to spend a week together at each of our houses every summer.
It gives the kids time to bond and play and it gives Natalie and me the chance to sew, stay up late watching movies and just hang out!
Usually I drive out there for a week and bring her and the kids back with me, and then Joe will drive out to spend a long weekend with us and take his family home.
This year it worked differently and most of our time here was watching Mom, so I was really looking forward to our time in Arizona.
It was really refreshing to spend a week away.
Although I was still on the phone every day handling some things with caregivers and Mom's doctor/nurse (post to come on that topic), I was able to refresh and spend time with my best friend.
This has been a very difficult summer for me.
With Mom's disease progression and having to do things I never imagined I'd have to do, having the kids home full-time and fighting with each other, and me deciding a few months earlier to go off of my anti-depressant (probably not the best decision I've made), I have been overwhelmed emotionally.
I don't like talking about the fact that I had to go on anti-depressants a couple of years ago, but it is what it is.
It's a sad reality for a large number of family caregivers.
The truth is, I've been extremely emotional.
It seems like everyday I am on the verge of tears and probably once a week I end up with a crying fit.
I have felt stressed out, tired, discouraged, angry and lonely...to name just a few emotions.
One close friend of mine remarked to me that my countenance has changed over the past few months.
Although it's hard for me to hear that, she is right.
Many days the despair and grief are almost too much to bear; it's hard to see the sunshine with the dark clouds looming overhead.
All this to say, I've really needed my best friend.
My family likes to tease Natalie and me for being so outspoken on our BFF status.
We like to have fun with it too (if they're gonna tease us, we're gonna annoy them!)
and we've made BFF shirts and bought matching outfits and had photo shoots with it all.
We might be a little crazy but that's okay, we have fun together and sometimes I just need to laugh.
They can make fun of us all they want, but they don't really understand our relationship.
The truth is, I feel like Natalie is the one person who really "gets" me.
This isn't to say that my other friends aren't great; truly, I've been blessed in the friend department and I have a lot of great friends in my life who are there for me when I need them.
And let's not forget to mention my husband; I'm really lucky he puts up with me.
I just feel like Natalie and I get each other; we have a special connection.
We've both been through hard losses, some of which we've gone through together, and we understand each other.
I don't have to tell her how I'm feeling, she just knows.
We both know what each other needs to brighten up the day and know that we are there for one another unconditionally.
I don't have to tell her that the reason I am feeling edgy or moody or sad is because I am mourning my mom; she just knows.
I know it sounds really corny, but if ever there were such a thing as friend soul-mates, we would be it!
She loves me, flaws and all!
And I feel the same about her.
I am so blessed to have her in my life.
Coming home from Arizona was hard.
Don't get me wrong-I was happy to be with my husband again, I missed him while we were gone.
But now I miss my bff.
In a perfect world, we'd be neighbors and we would see each other everyday.
Now that I'm home, it's back to reality.
I feel like I'm back to where I was before she came; alone in managing these complicated emotions of caring for my mom.
:( 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, July 7, 2016>
My brother is on his way into town.
My dad is taking a much needed vacation with his sisters and cousin and will be gone for a week.
My brother and his family are coming to stay and help out with Mom while he's gone.
Over the past couple of days, in preparation of his arrival, I was reflecting on how much Mom has changed in just 3 months, since Joe last saw her.
The most obvious change is that Mom is now in diapers full time; Joe knows about that.
I've related the shower struggles and the ever-increasing loss of words and language.
But then there are the changes that we don't talk about daily.
These are the changes that happen so gradually that it's hard to remember precisely when it started.
Mom no longer changes into pajamas at night.
In fact, she no longer changes at all.
She used to change her clothes if she didn't like my wardrobe selection for her; not anymore.
She stays in the same clothes until someone changes her and requires full assistance to get them off and on.
Mom only has 3 names left in her vocabulary: Bud, Cassandra and Ellen.
I don't know if she remembers who my sister is or any of the grandkids (I think she knows that they belong to me).
But the only names and the only people she ever asks for is my dad, my aunt and myself.
I think it's a little strange that she still remembers Ellen but not Claudia (her other sister).
Claudia comes over weekly to sit with her; Ellen has been over twice over the past 4 years.
I assume it has to do with her obsession to walk to Ellen's house.
It is the one ritual that she has left and holds onto.
Mom doesn't put any make-up on anymore, not even blue eyebrows.
She tries sometimes, but it's hard to put on lipstick when the lid is still on the tube.
Every once in a while she might get a bottle/container open and she'll end up with eyeshadow or lipstick smeared across her whole face.
Toothpaste seems to be her favorite choice of moisturizer.
I am with Mom nearly everyday, so the changes aren't as obvious to me.
I wonder what it must be like to come and see her after being away for a few months.
I am nervous for what lies ahead this week; worried if my brother can handle it all.
But also, I'm so relieved that they will be here to help with Mom and to share responsibility with me.
At least I know that we are all in this together!
Here's hoping that my dad has a restful, stress-free, fun week away!
He sure deserves it!
If you're reading this, Dad, don't worry-we've got this!
Also, put away your phone and go have fun!
;)
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 27, 2016>
They say that all good things must come to an end.
This week we officially "put an end" to our church volunteers.
For the past 3 years, wonderful ladies from our church have been volunteering their time to come over and sit with mom.
When mom and dad's ward saw the need, they filled it.
Every Sunday, the "compassionate service leader" passed around a sign up sheet in the women's auxiliary (called the "Relief Society") and women from church signed up for two 4 hour shifts throughout the week.
Additionally, if we were ever in a jam, we knew we could count on them to help us out.
This was such a huge relief for us, especially in the beginning when were first discovering that Mom needed some extra supervision to keep her safe at home.
It was a huge relief and stress off my back (as the caregiver coordinator) to know that there were those two periods of time that I never had to worry about.
I knew that they would always pull through for us.
About 6 months ago, our wards changed and Mom and Dad were merged into my ward (our church operates in boundaries, much like a school district system).
This meant a new coordinator in Relief Society and a different group of women.
While the ladies in the other ward had come to love Mom and looked forward to their service with her, this new group wasn't as familiar with our routine and need, so it's been more of a struggle to get people to sign up (or show up when they do sign up).
I don't fault or blame anyone, it is what it is and it may be a lot to ask people to sign up for.
Dad and I have been discussing the phasing out of volunteers and knew that it wouldn't last forever.
As expected with this disease, Mom is advancing in progression.
In some ways it is easier (she spends a lot of time in bed) but in some ways it is much harder, especially now that she is diapers full time.
We've been very fortunate to have no issues on our volunteers' watch, but I know that we have just been biding our time.
It will inevitably happen that Mom has a big mess while a volunteer is with her, and I wouldn't expect them to have to clean up that mess.
Taking all of these factors into account, we have officially called off our church volunteers.
It is bittersweet.
I have come to love many of these women who have so selflessly and compassionately loved and served my family.
I know that many of them have come to love and care for my mom as well (and they are certainly welcome to come visit!)
On behalf of my family, I want to give our sincere gratitude and thanks to all of the women over the past few years who have stepped up and helped to ease our burden.
We could not have done this without you!
We love you and will forever remember the great service you gave to us in our time of need.
I don't know that I can ever repay each individual back, but I hope to repay it back by giving others service in their time of need.
Love, service and compassion is what makes the world go round!
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 11, 2016>
Dementia makes you crazy.
I'm not talking about the person diagnosed with the disease; I'm talking about the caregiver.
I'm talking about myself.
If there's a sane caregiver out there, I'd like to meet them.
Or maybe not, because then I'd feel even worse.
Lately I feel like my emotions are all over the place.
Sometimes I feel strong, resolute.
I am proactive with my work in the foundation, which gives me a focus and a purpose.
I am patient with my mom and I get the job done without breaking.
I try to focus on all of the good things I have going on in my life, things that bring me joy: my beautiful kids, my incredible husband, my amazing and supportive friends, my home-based sewing business (which doubles as my therapy time!).
But mostly, I just put on a brave face as I face the day, going to play dates, escorting the kids to their sporting events, attending church groups.
I wear a smile on my face but inside, my heart is ripping into two.
The truth is, my mom is always on my mind.
Always.
The sadness always lingers with me, like a black cloud.
I worry and think about her when I'm away and miss her when I'm with her.
It's a complicated thing-to grieve for someone who is still living.
I don't think there's any way to describe it to a person who has never experienced it.
You grieve for the loss of the person that was once there, while still holding on to the physical being that remains.
The grief is relentless and suffocating at times.
I feel on edge; any unpleasant thing can bring me to tears.
I am a ticking time bomb; one wrong move can set me off.
It's a continual rollercoaster of emotions; one day I'm up, the next I'm down.
Over the weekend, we received some unpleasant news that kind of sent me into a downward spiral.
It would have been upsetting even if my life weren't plagued by dementia, but that dark, hovering raincloud (called dementia) met with this other passing, dark cloud and together they brewed a nasty storm.
I stewed about this particular situation for days and I was left feeling, hurt, sad, and angry.
Very angry.
I'm not even saying my anger is justified, but when you're already slightly unbalanced it's as if the senses are heightened and what might start out as disappointment or sadness can easily fester into some other (stronger) emotion.
For me, it was a lot of anger.
Anger at the situation but probably mostly triggered by this disease.
I'm angry that dementia has made me such a basket case.
I'm angry for the strain it has put on some of my relationships, and at the people who I feel have let me down over the years.
And most of all I am ANGRY that this disease struck my mom.
I am angry for her, that she has been robbed of what is supposed to be the best years of her life.
I am angry that my dad is losing the love of his life, for the pain and the helplessness he feels at watching her slowly fade away each and every day; for the helplessness I feel for not being able to fix it and make it better.
I am angry that I've lost my mother, who was so much more than my mom; she was also my friend, my confidant and therapist, the one person that I could talk to without fear of judgment, who could give me advice or help me navigate my way through a problem, the one person who loved me and thought the world of me.
I am angry that my children have lost their grandma and will never experience what I had growing up: the grandma to spend the night with, to bake cookies with, to have at every one of their music recitals or sports events or any important life event, to be their biggest cheerleader and to be their refuge from their "mean" parents.
This is the kind of grandma I had and this is the kind of grandma that my mom wanted to be.
And I'm ANGRY that was all taken away from us.
I don't usually post negativity on my blog; I like to keep it away and I don't want to sound like a whiny, sniveling baby.
I'm not the first person to lose their mom at a young age and I'm certainly not the last.
At the same time, I think it's only fair to my readers to be real.
Somebody out there might be reading this while riding their own rollercoaster of emotions and I think it's important for them to know that they aren't alone in this.
Because so often with this disease, we feel alone.
I feel alone.
You aren't crazy.
Or maybe you are.
But if you are, I'm right there with you!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 8, 2016>
Incontinence.
I hate that word.
I've known from the beginning that incontinence is part of the disease.
But four years ago, it was hard to imagine that it could actually happen to my mom.
I thought maybe it would skip her, or only happen in the very last weeks of her life.
In fact, I prayed that when the incontinent phase did hit full swing that the end would come quick.
Nobody should have to suffer like that.
My dad was optimistic that maybe this phase would pass over her altogether.
Mom's incontinence started in October, but it was sporadic.
She might go a few weeks without a single accident and then have accidents two or three days in a row.
It's easy to say to put a diaper on her, but much harder to do.
Over the past couple of months, there have been a few times that we have had to put diapers on her because on that given day she was continually wetting herself.
Once she was dry for a day or two, dad would put her back in regular underwear to preserve whatever amount of dignity was left, for as long as possible.
Unfortunately, over the past two week, the incontinence has been an everyday occurrence which has resulted in Mom's use of diapers on a daily basis.
It breaks my heart, yet I've known it was coming.
I've expected it.
I think up until a couple of weeks ago, my dad was still hoping we could bypass the constant use of diapers.
Putting the diapers on mom has eliminated a lot of mess and stress of cleaning up some pretty messy accidents, but there are downsides to diapers, aside from the obvious (losing one's dignity).
Today, when I bathed mom, I discovered red bumps on her bottom.
I couldn't but let out a little cry when I saw them.
"Oh mom, you poor thing," I said, as she stepped into the shower.
My maternal instincts set in and I felt pained and saddened when I saw her bottom.
Poor dear must be miserable!
Even though we try to stay on top of things and change her when she's wet, she's still developed a rash.
I didn't have any desitin on hand to treat it (I'll be making a run to the pharmacy here in a bit!
), but my dad did have cornstarch in his cupboard.
Linda, our caregiver, suggested we try it and I remembered how I used to use cornstarch for my babies whenever they had a bad diaper rash.
After I cleaned her up, I put some cornstarch in the diaper.
Tonight my dad will try desitin (or whatever the pharmacist might recommend!!)
Hopefully with persistent changing and cleansing, it'll clear up quickly.
But, I'm sure this is just the beginning.
I've read the horror stories of others who have been there already: diaper rashes, bed sores, frequent UTI's...I suppose it's just the next step in the disease.
But it sucks all the same :/
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 19, 2016>
Since last fall, I have been going over to Mom's house 3 times a week to help her through the shower.
This was a result of her going days without showering.
My dad, of course, would help her get in a couple times a week, but at that time Mom was still on somewhat of a schedule; or, at least, she knew day from night.
This presented a challenge because if Dad showered her when he got home from work at night, Mom became confused.
Showers signaled morning time for her.
Bathing her in the morning was difficult for Dad for a couple reasons: 1.
Mom was often still asleep when he left and 2.
It made him run late out the door.
In trying to lift my dad's load, I volunteered to go over a few times a week to help her get through the shower.
In the beginning it was pretty simple.
I would help her get undressed because she wouldn't voluntarily take off her clothes to hop in.
Once in the shower, she was able to go wash her hair and her body on her own.
Nevermind that she used 1/4 of the bottle of shampoo, conditioner and soap each time; she was getting the job done.
Over the course of the past 9 or 10 months, Mom's abilities to shower herself have decreased.
At first it was just cutting out the conditioner, then forgetting to wet her hair before she poured the shampoo on top.
All of these changes have forced me to get a little more involved with the showering process.
My dad put on a detachable shower head to make the job a little easier.
Our latest routine is this: I arrive at Mom's house after I drop the kids off to school.
I get all of her clothes ready and laid out on her vanity where she can see them.
She gets very anxious if she doesn't see clothes laid out for her.
I change out all of her towels and washcloths in the bathroom.
The towels have become an issue...for some reason Mom uses them to wipe herself now.
It's gotten to the point where (just this week) we bought her separate washcloths to leave in there for the sole purpose of her wiping and we take all of her shower towels out now after we are finished with showering.
I get her blow dryer ready and make sure everything is set to go; once she's in the shower, I can't leave her (I used to prep everything while she was in the shower).
Only once everything is ready to go do I begin the strip down.
I remove her mismatched earrings and adjustable "wedding" ring from her finger.
She isn't too happy about that, especially because I think she knows what is to come once the jewelry comes off.
I remove her shoes and socks, then the rest of her clothing, with no help from her.
It's like removing clothing from a struggling toddler, only she is bigger than me.
She will sometimes try to grab the clothes back from me or out of the hamper, so I have to be assertive and redirect her.
We are fortunate that she doesn't get aggressive with us (aggression is common in many forms of dementia).
I have to gently push her into the bathroom, where I turn on the shower head and she shakes her head at me, "no, no."
Once I get her in the shower, she kind of stands around, not sure what to do.
The bathroom is very small; there is just enough room for the shower stall and the toilet.
There isn't much room to maneuver around in so I've had to be creative in getting the job done.
I usually step onto the toilet and lean over the top of the shower, removing the shower head to wet down her head.
Usually she will grab the empty bottle of shampoo that sits on the shelf and then I take the full shampoo bottle, which sits on the back of the toilet, and pour it into her hands.
She will slap it onto her head and put her hand out for more, so I put the conditioner in her hands.
She doesn't make any efforts to rub it in anymore, so I lean over while she reaches for her loofah sponge and I quickly scrub her head.
She holds her sponge out for me to put soap on, which bottle also sits on the back of the toilet (we moved it all outside the shower because of the incredible amount of soaps she was using).
She used to wash her whole body herself, but now she runs it quickly across her chest and then hangs the sponge back up and turns off the water, without rinsing.
This is where it gets tricky.
I stand overhead with the shower head, trying to rinse her hair quickly, but once that water gets shut off she is ready to get out of the shower.
This leads me to opening the right side of the shower door, turning on the water again, while Mom grabs the squeegee to wipe off the shower doors.
It fascinates me that with everything she's forgotten, she still attempts to wipe down the glass doors with the squeegee!
While she is distracted with that, I grab her loofah sponge and quickly try to wash all of her body parts, and yes, I mean all of them.
This can be a bit uncomfortable for me, but I'm learning to deal with it.
Sometimes she is done before I can wash all parts, so I have to physically get in there and put my foot against the door so that she doesn't open it.
Last Friday, I forgot that important step in the process (putting my foot to block the door) and in an attempt to jet out of the shower, Mom opened the left side shower door and slammed it into my head.
It hurt like heck and left a pretty good goose egg just above my eyebrow!
You can kind of see it in the picture, it's kind of hard because I do have make-up on, but if you look closely you can see it (I was going to an 80's dance with my son, so don't mind the gobs of make-up and 80's accessories, ha ha).
It's a struggle to get her washing and rinsing completed, but I usually win, though I'm usually wet by the time this whole process is over.
I've learned to take off my shoes and socks and usually come over in my work out clothes now.
Mom then grabs the towel and begins drying off.
She used to be very thorough at drying herself, getting every nook and cranny.
Now, she leaves herself very wet so I take the towel and help her to dry off her body and squeeze the excess water from her hair.
Just as I used to do with my children when they were toddlers, I help my mom get dressed.
I prep her underwear and bring it down to her feet where she can step into them, holding onto the wall.
Then I put on her undershirt as she lifts her arms over her head and dives her head in the hole of the neckline that I have stretched open for her.
Next comes her pants and then her shirt.
It has to be in this order or she gets confused.
If I hold up the shirt before the pants then she will think she needs to step into them, so I try to keep it in the same order.
Up until a couple of months ago, Mom was putting on her own shoes and socks, but that has become increasingly difficult for her.
Now, she holds her foot out for me, only raising it a couple of inches and holding her balance on the wall or vanity, while I scrunch up her socks and place them on her feet, stretching them past her heel and up her ankle.
It's becoming a bit trickier to get the job done, but between my dad and me, we seem to get the job done and come up with creative ways to make it happen.
We've contemplated putting her in the bathtub rather than the shower, but I think that would be harder because she doesn't know the bathtub, she knows the shower.
Since she doesn't really know day from night anymore (she is up in the middle of the night almost regularly), I think it might be easier for my dad to just hop in there with her at night and shower her; not that I'm trying to get out of helping...I'm happy to help.
I'm just brainstorming the most effective to handle the situation.
It is working for right now...but it gets more and more difficult with each passing week. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 16, 2016>
Probably the hardest week of the whole year is [what I call] Mother's Week.
Mom's birthday always falls in the same week as Mother's Day-sometimes even on the same day.
In fact, two years ago, her birthday fell on Mother's Day.
It was the last birthday she remembered, as I had predicted in my post.
Last year, she had no clue what Mother's Day, OR her birthday, were.
We were hopeful that something might spark her memory, but without any luck.
This year, we knew well enough that she would have no clue about any of it.
She doesn't know what day of the week it is, let alone the month or day or anything significant.
She has lost concept of time, oftentimes doesn't know the difference between day and night, and one day just runs into the next for her.
The week leading up to Mother's Week was a little emotional, as I prepared for another year without my mom.
But I didn't want to spoil the day by feeling sorry for myself, so I prepared myself mentally and made plans to spend time with my mom, despite her lack of comprehension.
I still feel the need to DO something for my mom on special occassions, but what can you do for someone who doesn't understand and appreciate the significance of the day, or have any interest in anything?
The best thing I can do for my mom is to care for her.
So I decided to sell my toffee again to raise money for her caregiving fund.
I kind of put it out there last minute, but I sold about  40 pounds!
Thanks to my sister and my sister-in-law, Amber, for donating some of their time to help me get this done.
I tend to bite off more than I can chew ;) Doing this helped me to feel like, despite mom's lack of understanding, I was still able to give something to her to honor her special days.
On Mother's Day, I enjoyed a short visit with mom, at her house.
I took her to do the one thing she still seems to enjoy: take a walk to her sister's house.
She only stays for 2-3 minute visits now, but that 2 minutes makes her day.
Twice, as we were walking, I could make out the words "Thank you thank you" as we made our way to her sister's.
Simple as it is, it's the best I could think of to do for her.
On her birthday, we celebrated (without her) at her favorite restaurant once again: Miguel's Jr. We did it as our 2nd annual foundation fundraiser in honor of my mom.
I'm not sure yet how we did (financially), but there were quite a few familiar faces in the dining room and people I didn't even recognize who walked in with fliers.
Word is getting out; people are hearing about the foundation and supporting our cause while friends continue to come and celebrate my mom and support us in our journey.
This support means the world to me.
I know it means a lot to my dad, as well.
Mother's Week was emotional; I think it always will be.
I've learned that it's okay to let a few tears slide.
Though there was sadness in missing my mom, there was also a beauty in celebrating her and serving her.
I am continued to be touched by the friendship and the love of friends and family that surround me.
For that, I feel truly blessed.
I don't know what next year holds for us, but for this year, she was still here physically and I was able to hold her and kiss her and tell her I love her; I am grateful for that. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 25, 2016>
Dementia is such an emotional roller coaster.
Lately, I feel like I've been holding everything inside.
I'm not a big crier...I'm sensitive and emotional at times but I don't like crying, especially in front of people.
So what do I do?
I hold it all in until I end up having an emotional break down.
The past couple of months have been extremely difficult for me-with having to put my mom in a diaper and watching her decline more and more (that's just the tip of the iceberg).
It's emotionally exhausting.
I try to be strong: for my family and for myself.
I tell myself that I can handle this and that I'm not going to let this disease break me.
There are days that I do feel very strong and kept together.
But then there are other days where it is just too much.
The past couple months have had many days like that and it's been building and building inside my dam of emotions.
On top of the stress and heartache of my mom, I still have a life outside of caring for her.
It's a balancing act to try and be everything for everyone.
I try to take some of the burden off my dad by caring for my mom on my assigned days, and filling in when others can't make it, and I take care of the caregiving schedule.
That seems easy enough but it can also be a headache at times.
It seems like for the past two months, there are at least a couple shifts per week that are uncovered, so I'm scrambling to find someone to cover or I end up doing it myself.
Sports season is in full swing now as well.
We've had baseball and acro (tumbling), swim team, GATE club (an after school program for gifted and talented education), church activity days and then my daughter wanted to do a song/dance with a group of friends for the school talent show.
It ended up being a little more involved that I thought it would be, so for the past 2 1/2 months we've spent 1-2 hours every Wednesday after school teaching the girls the song and choreography for that dance.
If sister is in the talent show, then brother wants to be in too so we've also been working on an act once a week with my son and his two friends.
Needless to say, my plate has been full!
I'm no different than any other mom; we all have a lot on our plates.
But with all factors involved, I've been left feeling drained by the end of the day, physically and mentally.
Last week was the talent show (now I can mark one thing off my list) and I almost made it through seamlessly.
Almost.
Unfortunately, there were a couple of kinks to work out at last minute which resulted in a lot of stress the day before the show.
Luckily everything worked out, but in the moment it was a little bit more than I could take and I kind of took the brunt of it for both groups.
Some things were said that hurt my feelings but I know that I'm also extra sensitive right now because everything has been building.
By Thursday night, the dam had broken and I locked myself in my bedroom, laid on my floor for an hour and half, un-functional, as the tears poured out, unstoppable.
I felt stupid for a lot of things, including my reaction to the stress, but I guess it was inevitable with everything I'd been holding in.
I cried for everything that had transpired those past couple of days but that was really just the icing on the cake.
I knew many of my tears were those that I was holding back for my mom.
Today is the start of a new week.
I'm ready to wipe away the tears and move forward.
But I need to learn that crying is okay.
I've lost a lot; I don't say that to pity myself, but rather to reassure myself to be patient with myself and know that I don't have to hold it all in all the time.
Many people don't know what it's like to lose someone who is still living.
I'm not perfect and I never will be.
But I am doing my best!
And now, for your viewing pleasure, and to make this post a little more happy, I'm sharing my kids' videos from the talent show.
My son did a glow-in-the-dark dance with his two best friends.
He is the one in the green, to the far right.
Click here to see his video.
My daughter performed a song and dance to Annie's "Hard Knock Life" with 7 other friends.
She is the one who starts out holding the sheet, on the left, and she does the solo part mocking Ms. Hannigan.
You can view her video here.
I'm proud of my kids and for their hard work!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 21, 2016>
While raising my children, there have been certain milestones that I've waited for them to reach as they've grown.
The earliest milestones that I can remember include sitting up on their own, first words, crawling, walking, eating solid foods.
As they've grown, they've learned so much within those first few years of life: developing fine and gross motor skills, learning how to socialize with their peers, how to tie their shoes, and perhaps one of my favorites: how to go potty on their own.
The list of accomplishments goes on and on.
With each milestone, I feel a sense a pride at the tasks my child has accomplished and I marvel in the wonder of them learning and developing into little people.
With dementia, these same sorts of "milestones" exist, only they are not so pleasing and exciting.
Rather, they are quite the opposite.
Each "milestone" brings us closer and closer to the end.
Let me break down the "milestones" I am referring to.
I learned early on in the disease what we would be dealing with as mom's disease progressed.
It was hard to share this information with my family and I think there was even a bit of denial that it would really come down to this, and so I shouldered the burden of knowledge and waited for these things to come to pass.
I've said before that dementia is, in a sense, like growing backwards.
While children grow and learn new things with each year of life, my mom forgets these things with each year (or even more rapidly than that).
Dementia takes you from being an independent, intelligent adult to eventually becoming like a child again, fully dependent and not knowing how to care for oneself any longer.
I think of it in phases: the childhood phase, then the preschool phase, then down to toddler and finally infancy.
With each of these phases, mom seems to be on the developmental level of each of these age brackets as she forgets what she knew just months before.
First, she was losing her social inhibition (this tends to be one of the later skills that children master).
Slowly, she has been losing the ability of doing her hair and make up until finally, it looks as if a toddler has gotten into mother's make up box and smeared color all over her face.
She's gone from dressing herself to being super obsessive about matching (not being able to distinguish between matching and coordinating), dressing herself with clothes inside out and backwards to now needing assistance at times to get her clothes on and off.
Her fine motor skills have gone by the wayside; it started with misspelling, partial sentences and sloppy writing.
I haven't seen her read or write in close to a couple years now.
Her speech is very minimal; most words are gibberish and difficult to understand; comprehension is gone.
The later phases of the disease look a lot like infancy.
A person affected by dementia will eventually start losing balance and the ability to walk.
Chewing and swallowing become difficult and choking becomes a real concern.
As a result, many people end up with a liquid diet or pureed foods, much like baby food.
Incontinence sets in which results, most often, in adult diapers.
Speech regresses until there are no words left to speak.
They spend a lot of time sleeping, much like a newborn Indeed, it is like caring for a newborn child in an adult's body until finally, their body completely shuts down.
As you can imagine, it's been difficult to come to terms with all of this and I know my dad has remained the forever optimist, thinking maybe she won't get to those phases.
If she is spared from going through the complete course of the disease, it would only be because grace steps in and takes her from something else instead (a heart attack, stroke, etc).
I can't tell you how long my mom has left.
That question goes through our brains everyday.
I try to make the most of the time I do have with her because truly, we don't know how long until the disease rips away the rest of what is left.
And truthfully, I pray that when/if it gets to the point where she is completely bedridden, that it goes faster rather than slower.
At any rate, what I can tell you right now is my observations of what has been happening as of late.
For a while now, it seems like mom simply inhales her sandwiches and doesn't take the time to chew.
The other day I stopped to observe her while she ate her sandwich and I've noticed that she isn't really biting down when she chews.
She moves her jaw but what she does resembles more of "gumming" her food, like you'd see in a toddler.
I guess in this way it's somewhat of a blessing that all she'll eat is pb&j; sandwiches because at least it's a soft food and harder to choke on than say, a steak.
Even still, she eats quickly, swallowing large bits of sandwich that aren't chewed (this evidence was found in her vomit a few weeks ago) which results in coughing while she eats.
She often ends up with big hiccups by the end of her meal.
We won't talk about the mess that is made while she eats; if you've had a toddler, you can imagine.
We've also noticed several occasions where she has ensure spilled all down the front of her shirt.
She seems to be having problems drinking out of the bottle.
She will not drink out of cups; I'm not sure how that would go over if we tried.
She only drinks out of water bottles and ensure bottles and like I said, it's getting harder for her to make it all in her mouth.
We've been lucky that she's had no falls.
But I can tell that her balance and coordination is worsening.
When I help her to get her legs into her pants, she has to hold onto the wall of the bathroom to steady herself and prevent from falling over.
She can't raise her legs very high, so I bunch up the legs of the pants and bring them as far down to meet her foot as possible.
She has been struggling to get her socks on as well.
I usually bunch them up and help her get them on over her heel.
If I don't do this, she oftentimes can't get the sock on over her heel and she ends up with the sock hanging halfway off her foot and bunching up inside her shoe.
And one of the hardest things of all: incontinence.
This has been hard to talk about because it's like stripping away the last of her pride.
Of course, we know it's not her fault; it is the disease.
Nevertheless, it breaks my heart that she is struggling with getting to the bathroom in time; most times she doesn't seem to even notice that she's had an accident.
This issue began six months ago and has been progressing since then.
In times where she isn't feeling good (if she has a cold or something) it gets worse during that time period.
In fact, a couple of weeks ago, mom had a rough week.
The worst of it was on a Monday, when I was sitting with her.
She had a little bit of a cough and she had had several accidents between that Friday before and the Monday that I was there.
By Monday afternoon, she'd had an accident within an hour of her last accident and I was down to one dry pair of pants for her.
I knew what I should do, but it was really difficult in doing it.
My dad hasn't wanted to put my mom in diapers.
He wants her to be as independent as possible and I think there's a fear that once we put her in them, she'll become dependent and not use the toilet anymore.
I was really worried that he would be upset with my decision, but not knowing what else to do, I changed my mom into an adult diaper (I had brought over a pack months ago, just in case).
I can't describe to you how difficult it was for me to put that on her or to step back and look at my mom wearing it; she was resembling a grown toddler in every sense now.
My heart broke for her, but it was necessary.
Fortunately, the accidents lessened up by the end of that week so we went back to underwear and incontinence pads, but it is a battle that I'm afraid is not going away.
Additionally, we have struggled with her flushing things down the toilet (washcloths, pads, etc) and using towels in place of toilet paper...that is her new norm.
It's unpleasant and smelly but at least she is using something.
I've heard horror stories from other people.
I fear that it's truly the beginning of the end.
What I have described is typically what you see in the later phases of the disease, though there's no real guess as to how long the later phases can go on.
I think (from what I've read and heard from others' experiences) this phase can last a few years.
I speculate that we may have a couple years left at most.
But...she could surprise us all.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 14, 2016>
It's been exactly 4 years, 1 month and 1 week since mom's diagnosis of semantic dementia.
I still remember it like it was yesterday.
I had been anxiously waiting all day to talk to dad about how mom's visit at UCLA went.
When I called him for a report that evening, he responded that he'd rather not talk about it over the phone and suggested that I come over a little later to talk.
My stomach was in knots, a mixture of anxiousness and hesitation to hear the results, but also hope that they had figured out what was going on with mom-and were able to help her get better.
I helped my husband tuck the kids in bed and raced over my dad's house.
Though we suspected (due to our research on her symptoms) that there was something affecting the frontotemporal region of her brain, nothing could have prepared me for the news I was about to hear.
I remember walking in the front door and meeting my dad in the kitchen where he sat at the table.
He got up and busied himself with a few things while I stood nervously nearby, waiting for him to spit it out.
"So?"
I asked.
"What did they say?"
The image of my dad revealing the news will forever be seared into my memory.
"Well," he started, picking up a pamphlet from the table beside him.
"There's good news and there's bad news," he said, looking down at the pamphlet.
"The good news is that they are pretty sure they figured out what is wrong with her.
The bad news is that they say she has a brain disease called semantic dementia.
And, it's not going to get any better."
His eyes wouldn't meet mine when he said it.
He looked down at the floor, tears welling in his eyes as he fought the downward frown of his mouth in an effort to keep a brave front.
He dabbed at the corner of his and then finally brought his eyes to meet mine; I stared back at him speechless.
Semantic dementia.
Dementia.
The words played over and over in my mind.
What does that mean?
I didn't understand.
It couldn't have been dementia.
It was damage as a result of her surgery, and it was supposed to get better.
Dad handed me the pamphlet and recounted their day at UCLA: the tests, the questions, the explanations from the doctor, the plan for the next steps.
I felt confused and was left with many questions.
I went home that night and over the next several weeks I scoured the internet for any information on FTD, specifically semantic dementia.
Every medical article I read left me feeling more and more helpless, afraid and full of even more questions.
Additionally, I wasn't ready yet to tell my dad everything I was learning-and he wasn't ready to hear it- because the outlook was bleak.
Words and phrases such as "incontinence" and "difficulty swallowing" and "inability to speak" continually appeared over and over in my searches.
I remember feeling so overwhelmed and wanting someone to talk to-someone who had been through this themselves.
That search, however, was much more difficult.
Aside from a yahoo support group about PPA (a variant of FTD that closely resembles SD), my search came up empty.
There were plenty of people talking about Alzheimer's, but I couldn't find anyone writing or opening up about FTD.
In my state of loneliness, I decided it might be therapeutic for me to write down what was happening and how I was feeling.
It was an outlet for me and also a way to track mom's progression.
I wrote it in the form of a blog (this blog) but had it set to private; it was only for my eyes.
A short time later, however, I mentioned to my sister about my writings and I sent her an invitation to read my private blog.
She was relieved to see it written out in a way that people could easily understand what was going on with mom and she asked my permission to share it with a few of her friends.
At that point, few people knew of my mom's diagnosis and it was really difficult to articulate and explain to people what that meant.
Along with that, several friends and family members were put off by mom's odd behavior.
After talking with my sister, I decided to send my blog along to family members to read so they could gain an understanding and empathy for what mom was going through (note: by the time mom had received a diagnosis, she did not understand what the word dementia meant).
My family thanked me for opening up and sharing and were sympathetic to what was happening.
Furthermore, they were able to see my mom in a different light; rather than being put off by her oddities, they began to understand that her behavior was beyond her control and they made more efforts to be kind and understanding.
Shortly after that, my sister sent my blog to a good friend of hers, and this friend messaged me and said, "You have a true talent for writing.
Have you considered opening up this blog for others to read?
You could probably help a lot of other people."
The thought hadn't crossed my mind; I didn't want to do anything to further my dad's pain or make him uncomfortable.
Yet, I couldn't forget the feeling of isolation and loneliness I felt those months after mom's diagnosis; a feeling that nobody around me understood the heartache I was going through.
I thought on the idea for a couple of weeks before mustering up enough courage to talk to my dad.
With his blessing, I opened up my blog to share with other people.
Over the [nearly] past 4 years, I have had many people email and reach out to me to thank me for writing while sharing their own experiences of their mom/dad/brother/grandma/etc with FTD.
It has been such a blessing to me to connect with all of these people.
There are moments I have doubted myself for writing, but every time I receive a new message of gratitude from someone else across the globe who is struggling like me, I know I am doing the right thing.
By sharing their stories with me, it helps me to know that I am not alone in this either.
There are other people out there who understand exactly the heartache my family is experiencing.
That was a bit of a long introduction to what this post is really about.
But the past few days have brought up a lot of past memories and recollections and I feel it's an important background for what I'm going to write about next.
Several months ago, a friend sent me a link to an interview in Redbook magazine with Kimberly Williams-Paisley (who you all know as the adorable bride on the screen hit "Father of the Bride"...one of my and my dad's favorite movies!!)
It was a heartwrenching interview, actually written a few years ago, about Kimberly's mother's disease: FTD (specifically, primary progressive aphasia, which is the sister disease to my mom's semantic dementia).
As I read her interview, I felt a connection to this person, who I had never met.
I could relate to so much of what she said and at times I felt like I was reading something that I had written myself!
It was an indescribable feeling to know that I wasn't alone in what I was dealing with and the personal battles I was facing.
I thought to myself, finally!
Someone who know exactly what I am going through and that could relate to me!
(nevermind that she's a celebrity who I'll never meet, ha ha).
After a little more research, I learned that she was a writing a book-a memoir about her family's journey with this disease.
I haven't admitted this on my blog before...but I actually started writing my own memoir of our family's journey a couple of years ago, using excerpts of my blog, after the promptings and encouragement of several readers and family members (it's a long work in progress).
I couldn't wait to read her book.
As soon as I learned of the release date and preorders were made available, I ordered a copy of her book, entitled: "Where The Light Gets In."
The day the book was released, it arrived on my doorstep.
I have spent the past few days engrossed in this book; every quiet moment I could sneak in, I buried my nose in her words.
There were parts where I literally laughed out loud and exclaimed to my husband "Jeff, this is just like mom!"
And other parts where I had to hold back the tears (I couldn't have any other parents at swim practice see tears sliding down my cheeks!).
I could relate to all of the emotions she wrote about in her journey: the fear, the anger, the denial, the acceptance of her mom (in fact, one section of the book reminded me of the blog post I wrote for another site, about learning to love my mom again).
I could especially relate to Kimberly's sister, Ashley, who like me, bore the burden of knowledge from reading and educating herself on what was to come, while other family members weren't quite ready to hear it.
I believe Ashley and I were even on the same yahoo ppa support group!
I appreciate that Kimberly put it all out there; she didn't hold back.
I know from experience how vulnerable you become when you open up and share with the world, especially not knowing how people will receive it.
But I appreciate that she did this.
Her words have helped me and I know they have/will help so many others who are going through this.
(And, she's inspired me to start writing again!)
I wish this book would have been available the minute I learned of my mom's disease.
It would've been such a comfort to me in those lonely times to know that I was, in fact, not alone in what I was facing.
I am sharing and recommending this book to all of my readers: whether you are just starting out in your journey, whether you find yourselves in the later stages, or even if you are a reader not stricken by this tragedy known as dementia, Kimberly's book was an uplifting book and sent an inspiring message of family and unconditional love.
So, if you haven't gotten your copy yet, go buy it.
In fact, go buy it on Amazon.
And when you do, please take 20 seconds to register yourself on Amazon Smile as your gateway to enter Amazon shopping (bookmark it!)
You can select The DEANA Foundation as your favorite charity and every time you shop, the foundation will receive a small portion of what you spend.
It is such an easy and practically effortless way that you can help the foundation, in turn helping families affected by dementia. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 4, 2016>
I've been struggling with writing over the past month or so.
To be honest, I've been in a bit of a funk and been feeling really down about things regarding mom.
Her disease continues to progress, we've struggled with having consistent help (which has resulted in a lot of extra shifts for me).
Don't get me wrong-I don't resent being here to help.
In fact, I am grateful that I have the flexibility much of the time to come over and be with her.
But there are times that it all gets to be a bit overwhelming.
Sometimes it's hard to not think about all that we've lost and imagine what life would be like if mom had never met this fate.
I find my thoughts drifting and imagining how different life would be for my children if they had their grandma here to love them and nurture them, and me having a mom to guide me with her wisdom.
This is where my mind has been over the past month and I just haven't felt up to writing about all of my woes.
So today the pity party must end.
It's time to get back on track and be the strength that my family needs.
I figure it's okay to cry about it now and then, but I have to pick myself up and move forward.
Today I'll share something a little more lighthearted.
To begin with, mom's hair has grown out very long.
This is the longest I've ever seen her hair!
For a while it was kind of fun to see her hair long, but she no longer brushes it and even more recently, she is struggling with washing it.
It used to be that I could get her into the shower and she'd wash her hair by herself.
Now, she doesn't even get her hair wet.
She pours half a bottle of shampoo on her dry head and leaves it at that.
Needless to say, I've had to get in there and be more proactive at helping her wash and the length has added a challenge to both the washing and combing/drying process (she doesn't stand still long enough for me to dry it all the way).
My dad and I figured it was time to get her a hair cut, but of course that it is another problem in and of itself.
She has completely forgotten about going to the salon and if we try it at home, how do we get her to sit still long enough to cut it?
I suggested to my dad that we try while she is outside sitting in her chair, since that seems to be her new favorite past time.
We thought about bringing a professional in, but that would be challenging for them and since we know her best, I decided I could make an attempt at cutting her hair.
I'm no professional by any means, but I've trimmed before and at the end of the day, it probably doesn't matter much if it's a perfect cut.
Yesterday was the big day.
When I went to dad's house, we got out the scissors and lured mom out into the front yard and into her chair.
The second I touched her hair, she protested.
I had my nephew and my husband for back up while I tried to quickly cut the bulk of her hair.
She wasn't too happy with it, but in the end I succeeded in getting her hair cut above her shoulders.
I took off quite a bit of hair!
It was near impossible to touch it up and get it perfect.
I spent the remainder of the afternoon following her around with the scissors and cutting long stragglers.
I was able to get her sitting down a couple more times as I quickly attempted to even out parts of her hair.
The back ended up a little layered and it almost has an A-line effect.
It's not perfection by a long shot but still, I think it suits her.
I love all the natural wave she has in her hair.
She has spent so many years drying and curling her hair with a curling iron that I never realized how much natural curl she has!
That must be where I get it from!
All in all, it worked out and I think it will be a whole lot easier managing mom's hair!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 22, 2016>
It's taken me some time to write this post.
I don't know why; I suppose the topic is just a bit uncomfortable, but it has to be talked about.
I am talking about the inevitable outcome of dementia.
The fact is, dementia is a terminal disease.
They will not list it as a cause of death on a death certificate (instead they will name it as heart failure, pneumonia, etc), but it is dementia that leads up to the final outcome.
It takes time to come to accept this.
For a long while, we held onto hope that we might find a cure or some way to reverse the effects of the disease.
While I don't think we can ever give up complete hope, we are wise enough to know that those chances are slim to none.
As my mom has declined more and more over this past year, I've begun to have a little bit of anxiety about what the near future holds.
By the end of last year, it was consuming my thoughts: what will happen when she goes?
Are we ready as we can be?
Does anyone else in my family, besides me, feel the necessity and the weight of the decisions that need to be made?
We've talked about things a little bit over the past few years.
When mom was more in her right mind she had talked about being buried in the same cemetery as her mom.
Oddly enough, mom had even talked about (in earlier times) songs she wanted sung at her funeral and how she wanted to be dressed.
Those things are always in the back of my mind.
We've had an idea of what needed to be done, it was all just a matter of getting it done.
It's a difficult step to take.
After having a conversation with my dad about my anxieties last month, he decided it was time to shop around for a plot and start getting things in order for the inevitable.
This is a good idea even when not dealing with a terminal illness, but in situations such as these, it's even more important to get it done.
We've learned quite a few times over the past few years, in losing loved ones, how much easier it is to have these things in order beforehand, rather than facing it in the moment of loss and grief.
Dad made a phone call to a broker and got a price on a plot in the same cemetery that mom's mom is buried in.
He wasn't thrilled with the price-they've gone up a little since the last time he's done this-so he decided to go down to the cemetery himself and see if he could get a better price.
I offered to go with him, but on the day he was able to go, I had my 4 year old home (he would've been a distraction) so he just went alone.
He called me when he was finished to share the outcome.
"Were you able to get a better price?"
I asked.
"No, I actually paid a little bit more, BUT I was able to get a double plot two spots down from grandma and grandma.
What do you think?
Do you think that would make her happy?"
It was hard to even put into words how I felt, but I could feel my dad's love and devotion for my mom.
I could hear it in his voice, as there was a little bit of excitement that mom would be pleased with the choice he made.
Even though my mom is seemingly unaware of all that is going on around her, my dad still thought about her and what she would want, and he was willing to pay a little more to fulfill that wish for her.
If this isn't love, then I don't know what is.
Last weekend, on Valentine's Day, we visited the cemetery and decorated the graves of family members that we love and miss.
Dad was excited to show us where he and mom will one day rest together, just next to my grandparents.
You can see in the picture: the kids are at grandma and grandpa's grave and where dad is laying will be their spot.
To lighten the mood, dad laid down to demonstrate for us where he will be.
This may seem a little morbid to some people, but I love and admire my dad's sense of humor; it has really made all of this so much easier to talk about and accept.
Although we hate thinking about what is to come, at least we know that we won't have to deal with those decisions in the moment, and mom will be so happy to someday know of this beautiful, final act of love from my dad.
Death will not be the end.
It is not a final good-bye, but a "see you later".
It is only temporary until we can see my mom again, restored to her perfect, beautiful, self.
When the time comes that she leaves this life, it will be hard.
Really hard.
I still miss my family and friends (who have gone before me) every day.
It is an ache, like a homesickness that never goes away, but I believe I will see them all again.
This is the faith I hold on to that gets me through the sad times.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 10, 2016>
A few weeks ago, I was helping mom get ready after getting her out of the shower.
She still goes through the motions of doing her makeup but she gets very confused about what goes where.
One day, her mascara became an all purpose cosmetic: she used it for her eyebrows, her eyelids and lashes, her blush and her lipstick.
On this particular day, she reached for a tube of pink lipstick and took the lid off, staring at it as she tried to make sense of what it was.
Then, before I could stop her, she rubbed that tube of lipstick all over her cheeks.
Later that same evening, my 4-year old was entertaining himself while I was getting dinner prepped.
I could hear him upstairs and figured he was playing in his room.
He came downstairs and sang my name, "Mommy...." I looked up to see a huge grin of satisfaction on his face, his cheeks bright pink, as he held his sister's tube of lipstick in his hand.
And just to note-he did NOT see grandma's lipstick incident earlier that day.
This was pure coincidence.
What are the odds?
I've thought about this several times over the past couple of years: how similar my mom and my toddler/preschooler are.
There are many phases that they seem to go through together.
For example, they both wear their shoes on the wrong feet.
If I don't get each of their socks out for them, they wear mismatched socks.
There have even been times when both mom and Ryder wear different shoes on each foot.
Similarly, they have both been known to wear their clothes inside out and/or backwards; although Ryder hasn't done that in quite a while.
They both really love peanut butter and jelly sandwiches.
Grandma probably loves it more than Ryder, but pb&j; is always the comfort food for him!
They both require some assistance and supervision in the shower.
They both need help rinsing out their hair.
Ryder will use half the bottle of shampoo if I don't watch him and mom is no different!
Lately, my mom has been trying to sneak her pb&j; sandwiches into her room.
Oftentimes we will find them hidden under her pillow.
When we caught her smuggling the sandwiches in towels and sweatshirts, she found a new hiding place: her pants.
We get a good chuckle out of this one.
I can't tell you how many times I've caught my 4 year old sneaking candy in his pillowcase and yes, even down his pants!!
Sometimes we just have to sit back and laugh; I even find the things mom does to be somewhat endearing at times.
But if you sit back and think about, it really is sad.
My mom is operating on a toddler level at this stage of her life.
At times it has even seemed like I am caring for two toddlers, the only difference is that my son is learning new things each day; mom cannot learn anymore.
It's funny and silly when Ryder sneaks things in his pants or puts lipstick on his cheeks because it's a phase that we know he will outgrow.
I admit, we chuckle sometimes when mom does it too.
But the sad part is that, while Ryder is learning the correct way to do things, mom is "unlearning" everything she learned in those early years of life.
Every week seems to bring about new changes and we see her slip farther and farther away.
The farther she slips, the harder it becomes to watch.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 1, 2016>
Last January, I posted a full update about mom and the phase/progression of her disease.
I want to document where she is at now, one year later, for reference to my readers who are tracking their own loved one's progression, as well as for tracking purposes for myself.
LANGUAGE It has become increasingly difficult to understand what mom is saying, even for me.
Most of her speech is mumbling although every now and then she will say a word or two very clearly.
Those of us who are with her regularly can usually make out what she is trying to say by picking out a word or two that is understandable.
For example, she might "speak" several mumbled words but we can pick out "driver" or "cancelled" and we know that she is talking about how she was cancelled as a driver.
She uses gestures sometimes, pointing in a certain direction, which can also be a cue to what she is talking about.
For example, she might be "talking" and waving her hand up the street and off to the right while and we'll pick up on the word Ellen; this means she is talking about wanting to walk to Ellen's house.
We've learned to pick up on the cues and words that we can understand to figure out what she's talking about.
But there are times where we are completely stumped and can't make sense of what she's saying.
CONVERSATION As far as conversation goes...it is mostly non-existent.
Mom talks but comprehends next to nothing that we say.
Once in a while I might get her to understand what I am saying, usually if she talking about going to Ellen's and I answer (several times) with a "yes" that I will take her.
Most times, she seems to not comprehend anything we say or answer to her.
We try to use gestures and expressions to help aid in her understanding, but even that is difficult.
Nevertheless, we still continue to talk to her as though she understands.
My dad will tell her things and joke around like he's always done.
I will tell her things going on in my life (my daughter getting married, reminiscing about certain things) even though I know she doesn't understand.
I suppose it's comparable to having an infant; you know they don't understand what you're saying but you talk and smile anyway to try and capture their attention or with the hopes that they can feel your love through your communication.
HYGEINE Mom no longer bathes at all without assistance getting into the shower.
I come over 3 times a week and my dad covers the weekends.
She won't undress herself at shower time.
To get her in the shower, we have to physically remove her clothing from her, like you would a child, and guide her into the shower.
For the most part, she washes herself once she's in the shower.
She uses about 1/4-1/2 a bottle of shampoo and conditioner each time and just as much soap and usually requires some help rinsing it all out.
Once out of the shower, I help her get lotion on her body (her skin has been very dry lately) and I'll try to get some deodorant under her arms.
We help her get dressed so that her clothes are on right side out and frontwards.
Mom still goes to the bathroom by herself but over the past few months has started having issues with that.
She uses nearby towels and washcloths to wipe and will occasionally try to flush them down the toilet.
She has left a mess in the bathroom (and beyond) a few times; I've been lucky enough to discover and clean up one of those incidents, but usually it's my dad who stumbles into the mess.
She has had a few potty accidents but it hasn't been frequent enough for my dad to feel justified in putting her in diapers yet.
Sadly, I think by next year's update, the report will be diapers.
GROOMING Mom still goes through the motions of doing her make up, but she often gets confused at what goes where.
This morning, for instance, she used her mascara for her eyebrows, eyeshadow, blush and lipstick.
She went through the motion of putting on blush as well (she repeats many of the same steps several times) but she dipped the blush brush onto the blush lid; she didn't realize that the lid was on (it's a clear top).
She will use whatever is next to the sink in place of moisturizer, including toothpaste and soap.
She also tries to spray body spray (or whatever resembles body spray-for instance, air freshener) on her face.
Because of this, we've had to move a lot of products from her line of vision to avoid her hurting her eyes and whatnot.
This, of course, leads to her rummaging around looking for things and frustrated that things are not where they should be.
She will stroke her hair a couple of times with her hairbrush after her shower, but most times her hair is unkempt and sticking up-a stark contrast to where she was a couple years ago, when she plastered her hair down and wouldn't let even one hair stick up!
DAILY ACTIVITIES Mom's routine is completely disrupted.
She used to be very rigid on her schedules, as you may remember.
Now, her concept of time is almost completely gone.
She no longer waits until the time changes for computer time, eating time, bathroom time, etc.
She spends her days (and sometimes nights) pacing around the house, looking out (and sometimes banging on) the window or front door.
She is either looking for Bud (my dad) or talking about walking to Ellen's.
She does like to sit outside on the patio now on the chairs; she gets sneaky though.
If you won't stay right beside her she will try to get into the neighbor's backyard or walk up the street.
She doesn't take many walks anymore-it's complicated.
She will play only one computer game and only for a few minutes at a time.
She will lay down to nap now and then, but only for short spurts of time.
She changes her clothes several times a day, from pajamas to clothes to clothes she's dug out of the hamper.
They are almost always put on backwards and inside out.
This rotation of living room/front door, computer, wardrobe changes and naps will continue several times throughout each hour and day.
Despite our efforts, we cannot engage her in anything: music, TV, books, puzzles...you name it, she won't engage in it.
Except for walks.
She still likes her walks (most of the time).
EATING The only solid food she eats is peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, no exaggeration.
We've offered her other foods and she won't eat it.
She still makes her Slim Fast and drinks Ensure.
But none of this is on any kind of schedule like before.
She eats/drinks whenever she wants to.
Sometimes that means 2:30 in the morning and some days she will eat 5 sandwiches!
SLEEP Her sleep is all over the place.
Dad is lucky if she sleeps through the night.
Lately, she has been up several times throughout the night.
She will go to bed at 5:00 in the evening and wake up to start her day by midnight-getting dressed, making a sandwich, etc.
Dad usually changes her back into her jammies (to signal bedtime), gets her back into bed and will lay down with her to try and get some sleep, but she will often wake up within the hour and start the cycle all over again.
The other night my dad finally got to sleep just in time for his alarm clock to go off.
I really don't know how he does it.
CONCEPTS/COGNITIVITY  I'm not sure there's much to say in this section.
She doesn't understand most concepts a grown adults would grasp.
She is smart enough to try and hide her pb&j; sandwiches (in her pants!)
to sneak them into her bedroom because she knows we don't like her eating back there (jelly gets everywhere).
She is sneaky in a few things, so I know there are some things she understands but it's hard to know what she can/can't comprehend.
I don't know if she can write anymore.
She used to leave notes around the house but I haven't seen her write in probably a year, at least.
Every now and then I'll hear her read something (she'll read the "speed limit" sign in front of Ellen's house; that is her landmark to know where her house is).
But other times she will stare blankly at words and seem to not understand them.
I think there are probably a few familiar words left that she can read.
There you have it, a full update in a nutshell.
Some things seem to be the same as last year but some things are most definitely worse.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 16, 2016>
It's been a while since my last post.
The holidays were quite busy for me this year and it didn't leave me much time for blogging.
I did my 3rd annual toffee fundraiser to raise money for mom's caregiving fund.
Each year it is more successful.
This year I made over 70 pounds of toffee which profited more than $1000 for her fund.
I couldn't have done it without help: namely my Aunt Claudia, sisters-in-law Amber and Natalie, daughter Maurina and son-in-law Cameron.
I want to thank them all publicly for helping me with this effort!
And of course all of the people who buy from us every year!!
I have to admit, the holidays left me feeling more than a little down this year.
I feel like I've been able to keep upbeat the past couple years despite our loss, but this year it hit me hard.
Mom's disease has progressed so much over the year that it leaves me to wonder what next Christmas will bring.
Or will she even be here next Christmas?
Last year she had no concept of Christmas, but we were still able to engage her for a few brief minutes to look at some gifts we had bought her.
And we were also able to get her over to her sister's house on Christmas Eve to spend some time with her family.
This year was even worse than last.
There was absolutely NO engagement at all.
We knew we wouldn't be able to get her over to her sister's house again (I'm not entirely sure that she even knows who her sister, Claudia, is despite the fact that she comes over every week).
We didn't even attempt to take her because she wouldn't have understood and would have been anxious to leave the entire time.
Christmas day was just like every other day for her.
Nobody really got mom anything for Christmas this year because we all knew that it meant nothing to her.
My dad, however, did put a few gifts under the tree for her: a couple pairs of pants and a new shirt.
I just don't think he could've done Christmas any other way.
He couldn't get her to open them or even hold them at all; she paid no attention to any of it.
I suspect that so long as she is physically here, there will always be at least a few presents under the tree.
I struggled with the gift giving this year too.
I knew it wouldn't mean anything to her but at the same time, I couldn't stand the thought of not having something for my mom under the tree.
A couple of months ago, I bought a new semi-professional embroidery machine.
I have been having so much fun with it (sewing is my outlet and stress relief!)
and I've made some really cute projects for myself, my family and friends and also for customers.
One project, in particular, kept turning my thoughts to my mom.
I created a pillow cover with an embroidered temple and phrase "Families are Forever" on it.
The temple is significant in our religion because it is what (we believe) binds families together not just in this life, but in the eternities.
My mom loved the temple and she and my dad made their family a forever family in 1982, when I was just 11 months old.
I knew that if my mom was here today in her right mind, that she would adore my pillow and want one for her couch.
My belief in eternal families is what keeps me going in a positive direction.
Though we are losing her in this life, it is not the end.
One day, mom will be whole again and we will be together again.
That is the only thing that gives me any comfort.
The idea sounded a little silly even to me, but I decided I was going to make my mom a pillow for Christmas.
I knew she wouldn't open it or even look at it, let alone understand the significance of what it meant.
Nevertheless, I decided this was the perfect gift for my mom.
So I made the pillow and I let my dad stand in for mom to open it on Christmas morning.
I felt really choked up when he opened it, imagining my mom's reaction had she not been stricken with this awful disease.
My dad's eyes may have been a bit misty when he opened it (though I can neither confirm nor deny...he isn't one to show much emotion-he's a tough guy- and I'd never throw him under the bus and tell all his secrets ;) ).
I like to think that maybe in the next life, mom will remember all that happened in her life-maybe like she's woken from a dream.
Maybe someday she will appreciate the gift I made for her.
There isn't much else to say.
I love the holidays, but I'm glad they're over.
I don't know what next year brings, but it will be sad for a long time.
Somehow, I have to figure out a way to feel happy and not sad.
I am very blessed to have a beautiful family, immediate and extended, that bring joy into my life.
I can never fill the void of my mom, but I try to focus on the positive things in my life rather than the negative.
Some days (and years) are harder than others.
Next week I'll give a full update on mom's phase/stage/health.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 14, 2015>
People ask me all the time if there is medication to help slow the progression of dementia.
The answer is no.
There are some medications to help with the symptoms of the disease.
In mom's case, she has become very anxious with this disease.
Lately, she has been spending her days looking out the window and the front door and banging on them to get out.
The difficulty in taking her out is that she is unaware of any boundaries.
She doesn't look for cars when she walks into the street, she will walk into people's houses (usually people she knows, but she has been known to walk up to the wrong door).
Most of our caregivers are too nervous to take her out because they feel uncomfortable in how to manage whatever shenanigans mom gets into.
But mom gets restless being cooped inside the house day in and day out.
Dad started her on some anxiety meds a few weeks ago.
We felt like her anxiety (about getting out of the house) has gotten to the point that she needs something to calm her down-for her benefit as well as the caregivers, who feel helpless at times.
The medication seems to be working.
She still goes to the door and window several times a day, but she's not quite beating the door down like she was before.
Last week, I took mom to visit her sister again.
I thought it would calm her down for the day.
Her visit was brief and shortly after we returned home, she was looking out the door again.
She bounced between the front door and the window.
I knelt beside her on the couch, peering out the window, and she started pointing to the chairs that sat in front of the window, on the patio.
In her slurred manner of speaking, I made out what she was saying, "I can sit there, yeah?"
"Do you want to sit outside mom?"
I asked, debating if this would be a wise idea.
I decided I would try it out and see what mom did if I let her outside.
I was a little nervous that she would run off on me, but I am not uncomfortable with blocking her or physically bringing her back home (and she isn't too aggressive at this point).
I opened the door and told mom to come outside to sit down.
She looked at me, seemingly unsure if I was really going to let her out or not.
"I can go out yeah?"
she asked, hesitating at the door and looking at me suspiciously.
"Yes mom, you can come outside.
Come sit down in the chair.
It's a beautiful day," I said, motioning her over to the chairs.
Mom cautiously stepped one foot outside the door and ever so carefully made her way to the chair and sat down.
She sat forward, looking up the street and started waving her hands and talking.
I could make out a few words of what she was saying: "Kristie" (she wanted to go visit her friend/avon lady up the street), "driver" (she used to be a driver), "Ellen" (asking to go to Ellen's again).
I gave her the responses: "Kristie is at work", "I know, you were a good driver", "We already went to Ellen's".
After a few minutes, mom stepped up and started walking around the front yard, making her way over to the side gate.
She opened the gate and attempted to sit on a big, empty box that dad had sitting next to the trash can.
I directed her back to the chairs where it was safer to sit and she walked past the chairs and down the driveway.
I was getting a little nervous that she might try to bolt across the street so I stood in front of her and let her talk and point around the neighborhood.
She settled down a bit and sat on the brick wall that encircles the perimeter of the yard.
I sat down beside her and mom silently looked up the street.
Side by side we sat as the warm sun beat against our backs.
I glanced over at her and her eyes slowly closed as she said (rather clearly) and pointing to her back, "This feels good.
It's warm, it's not cold."
I smiled and agreed with mom.
My heart was warmed by her simple contentment to just sit outside and enjoy the sunshine.
Sometimes life gets so busy that we forget to appreciate the little things in life.
This time of year has been especially crazy and busy for me, but mom reminded me to take a few minutes to enjoy the simple things in life, like the feel of the warm sunshine on my back.
In that half hour that we spent sitting outside, I was able to just sit back and appreciate a moment with my mom, basking in the fresh air and sunshine.
It seems like such a small thing to those of us who enjoy everyday life to the fullest.
And life seems to buzz by so fast that we (or at least, I) sometimes forget to stop and appreciate the little things.
But to someone like my mom who has reverted back to a simpler life, this moment outside made her day.
I will always remember the way she looked when she was sitting on that brick wall, soaking up the sun and enjoying the moment.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 19, 2015>
I hate to be a doom and gloom kind of person, but lately I feel really....unsettled.
I don't know if that is the right word to describe it, but over the past few months I've kind of been feeling like I need to brace myself and prepare for some more difficult changes heading our way.
Mom's disease seems to have progressed to the late stages of the disease.
How long this stage lasts, I don't know.
But she is more than moderately advanced at this point.
I was reviewing the stages of semantic dementia from UCSF's website, and this was the description for the Severe stage: "After four to five years of SD, the disease is usually quite advanced, which means the person's language skills have significantly eroded, making communication very difficult while the behavioral problems have significantly increased.
Typical behaviors seen in late stage SD include disinhibition, apathy, compulsions, impaired face recognition, altered food preference and weight gain.
People with left-sided damage tend to show more interest in visual or non-verbal things while people with right-sided damage tend to prefer games with words and symbols.
The time from diagnosis to the end typically takes about six years, although this can vary significantly from person to person."
Over the past few months, mom has completely abandoned her rigid schedule and routine.
She eats and takes her medicine whenever she thinks it's time.
Sometimes, that means a peanut butter and jelly sandwich at midnight.
Sometimes, it means pajamas and bedtime at 2:00 in the afternoon.
She comprehends nothing that we say to her and her speech is hardly decipherable.
But those of you who read regularly already know most of that.
Let me tell you something that you don't know.
Twice over the past month (that I know of), mom has wet her pants.
I haven't written about it because I thought it might be humiliating for mom.
But you know what?
It isn't her fault that this disease is ripping away at her.
This is progression of the disease and this isn't anything that any of us should be ashamed about, least of all, mom.
I know my dad is hoping that it doesn't get to the point of full incontinence, but I fear that it will eventually get to that point.
On Sunday, I took my mom for a walk.
Of course she wanted to go to her sister's house, but her sister wasn't feeling up to a visit so I had to try and reroute mom.
Needless to say, mom didn't understand my explanation that we couldn't go to Ellen's house and onward she walked.
I finally called my dad, who drove up in his truck and brought us back home.
But in mom's mind, she was still going to Ellen's.
When we walked back into mom's house, she paced around the living room, calling for her sister.
"Ellen Ellen?
Is Ellen here, Ellen?"
She looked at my dad (who looked a bit confused that she was looking for Ellen in her own home) and I figured out what she thought: that we were at Ellen's house.
"Mom, Ellen isn't here.
This is your house mom, we are home at your house," I said to her.
"Ellen, she's not here, no?"
After a few minutes of this, mom rushed back towards the door (where I remained standing).
"Let's go let's go, she's not here no, let's go," mom said.
"Maybe show her the kitchen," dad suggested, hoping it would bring her back to her home.
I guided her into the kitchen and as we approached the doorway, she slowed down and peered in the next room suspiciously.
Finally, something sparked inside her.
"Oh!
We are home yeah?"
she asked.
"Yes, that's right mom, we are in your home now," I answered.
Her disorientation kind of caught me off guard.
That she didn't recognize her own home was surprising, even to me.
It seems like every week is something new and bizarre: attempting to use mouthwash for moisturizer, wearing a mismatched slipper with a shoe, wiping with a towel; one thing is clear: mom's world is losing order at a rapid pace.
What happens next?
I don't know.
One of the scary parts of this disease is not knowing what lies ahead.
As 2015 comes to a close, I wonder what 2016 will have in store for my mom.
.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 9, 2015>
When a woman loses her mom, it's kind of like losing a part of herself.
At least, that is how I feel about it.
There are so many questions that I wish I could ask my mom: questions about motherhood and parenting, about marriage and relationships.
Sometimes I feel alone and wish I had my mom to talk to about some of these more personal topics.
I wonder if my mom has ever had the same thoughts or feelings as I do?
Has she ever struggled with any of the things that I struggle with?
Last weekend, my dad pulled out my mom's journal.
She only kept one and it was only about 70 pages long, written between the years of 1980-2002.
But finding it and being able to read thoughts and experiences of my mom, in her own handwriting, was like finding a treasure.
I cannot begin to put into the words the comfort and the connection that I felt to my mom when I read her words.
I read about her joys and sorrows of being a motherhood (mostly joy...but motherhood is a difficult job much of the time).
I was able to read how she felt about her children, about me.
I read about events that had taken place, many of which I remember, from my mom's viewpoint.
I read of her deep love for my dad.
I always knew how much she loved my dad, but when I read her words it was like I was looking into her soul and seeing her deepest, most tender feelings.
While I feverishly read and devoured each word, I felt an inexplicable bond to my mom.
I found a part of myself in her, a part that I have been missing for a long time now.
I've thought a lot about this over the past couple years-about missing out on all of these discussions and connections with my mom.
My biggest fear is that someday my children will have to go through this, especially my daughter.
Don't get me wrong, I love my boys with all my heart, but daughters need their moms in a different way than sons do.
At any rate, at the beginning of this year, I decided to start a journal specifically for each child.
I don't write as often as I'd like, but I strive to write down thoughts and feelings to each individual child when I feel compelled.
Hopefully I will be around for a long while for my children, but if I'm not, then I want them to know me and I want them to know how I feel about them.
Hopefully my journals to them will be a treasure, just as my mom's journal is to me.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 2, 2015>
When I started blogging, it was originally a way for me to express my feelings and keep family and friends up-to-date on what was happening with mom.
I never imagined that I would have so many readers or people following our story.
We've received so much support and love throughout this journey and that really helps to get us through.
A couple months ago, I joined a task force, initiated by the mayor, for our city (actually, the city next to mine...we branched off from the city and became our own a few years ago).
The idea of this task force is to get Riverside certified as part of the Purple Alliance.
Becoming a purple city means that the city is taking steps to make the community a friendly place for people with dementia through education to the public and businesses, training law enforcement and emergency responders how to recognize and deal with a person who has dementia, and so forth.
It's about raising awareness and helping people to feel that they are not alone.
Since I've been attending these meetings, my name appeared on the task force list, which The Press Enterprise (newspaper) picked up.
I was contacted by a reporter in September and interviewed about my mom's story as well as the mission of The DEANA Foundation.
They (the reporter and photographer) also came and spent a morning with us, observing our day and taking pictures of mom and me.
It has been a mix of emotions to do this story.
It's exciting that we are bringing awareness to this disease and accomplishing a great work in our community.
I am open to sharing this with others in an effort to educate and make positive changes.
It is a little difficult to see mom's face in the paper as she is now; I know she would not be thrilled with her appearance these days, if she was in her right mind.
But I made sure to include some photos of "before" so that people can be reminded of the person she was-the person she really is.
She will always be beautiful to me, and whether she knows it now or not, her life still holds great meaning and she is helping others around her with her story.
You can read the full article here.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 26, 2015>
Lately, all mom wants to do ALL DAY LONG is leave the house-usually to go "exercise" to her sister's house (Ellen).
She paces all day long between her bedroom, computer and the front door.
She's started doing something new: she puts her mouth to the door and intakes deep breaths.
It sounds much like Lamaze breathing and looks like she is trying to suck in oxygen from outside, as if she can't breathe.
It makes me so sad to see.
I want to take her out walking but it's complicated.
I feel like I've got a pretty good handle on things and I'm not intimidated in the least to take care of my mom in any way.
I actually do like getting her out to walk.
However, I have to consider safety and it's difficult to wrangle both my mom and my 4 year old when walking on busy streets to Ellen's house.
I'm also concerned about whether or not mom can actually walk that far these days.
It's only a mile, but she tires much quicker now.
I used to be able to drive beside mom while she walked.
When she got tired, she hopped into my car and I drove her the rest of the way to Ellen's house.
She stayed on the sidewalk and looked for cars before crossing the street.
I received many funny looks as I crept behind her in my car, and even concerned neighbors asking if all was okay (understandably...I must have looked like a stalker!)
But I was okay with it if it gave mom a chance to get some exercise.
Unfortunately, my stalker-driving days came to an end a few weeks ago when I realized that it was no longer safe for mom to be out walking without someone directly by her side.
I was stopped, in my car, on the corner of the street, waiting for mom to safely cross.
A car was coming towards us, getting ready to turn the corner.
Mom looked and saw the car and paused.
As soon as the car started to turn, mom decided it was her turn to cross the street.
Thankfully the car stopped for mom; it could've been disastrous.
That was when I realized her walking-alone days were at an end.
So now the problem remains that mom wants to get out walking and is unable to.
Many of our volunteer caregivers are older and wouldn't be able to keep up with her (or have to maneuver her if needed).
She can't make it all the way to Ellen's anyway, so two people are needed to make this happen for her.
The past two weeks, I've been able to go over on Sunday afternoon and take mom out to walk to Ellen's.
I walk beside her while my husband stays with the kids at my dad's house and when mom gets tired, someone comes and picks us up in the car.
Last week, she was able to walk the entire way to my sister's house.
Yesterday, we started walking to Ellen's house but I called my dad when she started panting and pausing about half mile into our walk.
Sunday will probably be our new walking day, since that is a day when the family is gathered together and I have help to follow us.
I was able capture a sweet moment with my mom at Ellen's house.
Mom's new way of showing affection is shaking/holding hands with people.
She doesn't hug or kiss anymore, but when she grabs your hand, you know it is a show of affection for her.
Quite a few times now, mom has sat beside her sister on the couch, holding and swinging hands.
It warms my heart to catch those rare moments where mom's heart is happy.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 21, 2015>
I try to keep pretty positive on my posts, but sometimes this disease is so overwhelming.
For the past week I've been in a funk again; it's such a rollercoaster ride.
Part of my down mood comes from watching my mom's decline; it seems like every week there is something new that comes up in the progression of her disease.
I've also taken on a little bit of freelance work, writing for a website that talks about dementia and caregiving.
I just turned in my first assignment which took me nearly a week to gather my thoughts together for and write.
While I am thankful for the opportunity to educate others, and also to be able to write down my thoughts and experiences throughout all of this, it can be difficult at times.
Especially as I look back and reflect on all that has transpired over the past several years; it brings up many emotions-some good, and some not-so-good.
Even though I like to stay positive, I think it's important to share all sides of this journey, especially for readers who are going through this same thing.
They need to know that they are not alone and that it's normal to feel down and discouraged at times.
We are mourning the loss of someone we love who is still living, and that's a difficult thing to process.
One of mom's latest "things" that she is doing is crying.
They aren't full on tears, but very often she will ramble about something and then her voice gets a little deep and crackly, her eyes gloss up and her lips quiver downward.
She's done this a few times over the past year or so, but it is becoming very frequent now.
I would say that at least once throughout each visit/encounter with mom, I witness one of these crying episodes.
It breaks my heart.
I want to break down and cry with her-and nearly did the first time it started happening consistently.
I was helping her blow dry her hair a couple of weeks ago when mom started mumbling something.
I couldn't make out what she was trying to say but suddenly, out of nowhere, her eyes welled up, lips turned downward into a frown and her voice was cracking.
There were tears in the corner of her eyes and I was a little caught off guard.
"What's wrong mom?
What's the matter?"
I asked her.
Of course she didn't respond to my questioning, but she continued crying about something.
I turned off the blow dryer, looked into her eyes and patted her back, reassuring her that "it's okay".
I could've cried myself, although I'm not much of a crier.
My heart hurts every time she does this.
Much of the time I don't understand what she's saying and I have no idea what she is thinking that is making her feel emotional.
Is she scared?
Is she confused at what is happening to her?
Is she sad?
I feel so helpless.
I wish I could give her the comfort that she always gave to me.
My sister posted a little sentiment today about our experience over the weekend.
I was going to blog about it, but then she wrote it, so I'm just going to paste here what she wrote: "Sunday afternoon, my sister Cassandra walked with my mom over to my house.
As soon as she walked in, my mom began asking, "Jeremy, Dominic, Raelynn?"
I tried to explain that the kids were not there, but she continued to wander the first floor of the house looking for them.
Finally, she stopped in the kitchen and her eyes welled up with tears.
In the entirety of my mom's illness, I have never seen this, as some of her earliest symptoms were apathy and no show of emotion.
My sister and I rubbed her back and assured her the kids would be back shortly (I then called my dad, who was just getting to his house with my kids after church, to bring the kids over).
My mom sat on the stairs in the meantime, and when she saw one of my cats, she pointed and asked, "What's that?
What's that thing?"
My sister told my mom that she used to like cats and then took my mom's hand and stroked the cat.
When the kids walked in a couple of minutes later and came and hugged my mom, her eyes again welled with tears as she again asked, "Jeremy, Dominic, Raelynn?"
She visited for about 5-10 minutes before she was ready to go home.
I have been thinking about my mom a lot over the last couple of weeks, particularly how proud she would be of all of her grandchildren.
When I became pregnant with Jeremy at 18 years old, it was not an ideal situation and my mom was naturally worried; however, once he was born, he was my mom's pride and joy.
She loved being surrounded by her grandchildren; she loved babysitting, teaching, loving, and being a part of their activities.
She shows little interest now; she usually pats them on the head and smiles and then continues whatever she is doing.
No doubt that if she was herself, she would be the world's best grandma."
This disease is hard and the hardest parts are yet to come. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 14, 2015>
Last week we had a couple of celebrations of sorts.
First, we celebrated The DEANA Foundation's 1st birthday!
It's hard to believe that just one short year ago, we gathered together with an idea in mind and had our first official foundation meeting.
Exactly one year later, we awarded our first 2 caregiving grants!
We've made a lot of progress over the past year; we still have a long way to go, but we are getting there inch by inch.
Certainly, this was cause for celebration!
And so we held our foundation's 1st birthday party at Farrell's Ice Cream Parlour last Thursday.
We had a great turn out, a lot of which was family.
Due to other events of the week (which I'll cover in a minute), we had a lot of family visiting in town.
My dad's four sisters, several of my cousins and my twin brother's family all came into town and joined us for the celebration.
Three of my mom's four siblings also made it to the celebration (the 4th sibling lives in Montana).
We handed out buttons for every attendee to wear and it was just amazing to look around and see my mom's silhouette (our logo) being worn on all of our partygoers.
I can't even express what it felt like to have that show of support- not just for the foundation, but in honor of our inspiration behind the foundation: my mom.
Here are a few photos from that night, beginning with my mom's siblings and then some other photos of family and friends.
Sadly, the reason we had so much family in town was because my grandma (dad's mom) passed away a few weeks ago.
On Friday, we celebrated her life with all of our family and friends.
It is sad to see her go, but we had a lot of laughs (and some tears) at the great memories of grandma.
For the first time in many years, all 16 of her grandchildren were together.
It's sad that it takes death to bring people together, but good that we could all be here with each other.
Family is everything.
Saturday was the Walk to End Alzheimer's.
Because of all the family in town, we had a huge team this year!!
It was so amazing to have everyone there in love and support of my mom.
I know some people don't understand it (it doesn't change the situation with my mom), but walking together unites us and symbolizes our love and support for not just my mom, but for my dad as well.
My dad and I are a lot alike in that family support means a lot to us (I suppose it's most accurate to say that I've inherited this value from my dad).
I know that it meant the world to him to have all of his sisters there with him.
Family is everything to him.
I'm really glad that we were able to do this together and send the message to my dad loud and clear: he is not alone!
This year we also set up a foundation booth at the walk.
It was great to meet new people and make new connections!
We were also invited back to sing The National Anthem again (my sister, Christina, friend, Mickelle, and myself).
It's an honor to be asked to sing our country's anthem at an event so near and dear to me.
The coolest thing happened this year: the MC looked down from the stage and saw the Team Dee Superheroes and thought they all looked so awesome that he invited the whole team up to stand with us while we sang The National Anthem!
That was incredible!
As you can see, I have an amazing family.
I tear up just thinking about how awesome they are.
I couldn't have asked for a better way to spend all of these celebrations than with my family.
They mean the world to me!
This is what gets me through from one day to the next-knowing that all these people have my back and are there to help us get through this.
Thank you all for being so incredible!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 8, 2015>
One of the things I like about writing this blog is making connections with other people who are traveling this road.
I receive emails often and in a way it's comforting to know that I'm not alone.
About a year ago, a reader emailed me and entitled her email "Your mom is just like mine!"
It turns out that her mom was also diagnosed with FTD, the semantic variant.
Over our correspondences, we found so many striking similarities of our moms at that time.
We've become friends on facebook and although we don't talk often, I often think about her and her mom (as I do with all of the people I've emailed with!)
For some reason, I was just thinking of her the other day, in fact, and thought about how I should send her an email to check in and see how her mom was doing.
Today, however, my question was answered when I saw her post on facebook that her mom had passed away over the weekend.
I feel an incredible sadness for what this family is going through.
I have been feeling a bit melancholy today as this reminds me of what the future holds for my mom and my family.
The reality is that there are no survivors of dementia.
It is a disease that ravages a person day by day, inch by inch.
I don't know how much time we have left with my mom.
Some days it feels like she can live another 10 years like this because physically, she is in good health.
But then I am reminded that this is a disease of the brain; when the brain dies, eventually the body will catch up.
Even though I know what the future holds, I ask myself, am I ready for that?
I don't know how to answer.
On one hand, I believe in a life after this one, where my mom will be free of her disabilities and pain, a place where we will all be together again.
Other days, I don't feel like I am ready to give her that physical good-bye.
Dementia is an emotional roller coaster.
There are constantly ups and downs-or should I say downs and even more downs.
There isn't really anything "up" about it but I try to be positive in this journey and enjoy the time that I do have left with my mom.
Today, I feel sad.
I hold back my tears for this friend and her family and for the fate that awaits my own family.
I want to wrap my arms around my mom and hug her tight (even though she'll push me away!)
because I'll never know when one day might be the last.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 2, 2015>
A month or two ago, mom's blow dryer died.
For those of you who read regularly, you know of mom's attachment to her blow dryer.
My dad thought about replacing it, but it really was for the best that it disappeared as it was becoming a problem.
Consequently, mom complains daily about us "losing" her blow dryer.
Part of her resistance to get into the shower and wash her hair is due to the fact that she has no blow dryer for her hair (and wet body).
For weeks now, I've been meaning to bring over my blow dryer on the days I shower her.
By the time I get the kids off to school with everything they need, I forget to grab my blow dryer (and I head over to her house straight after drop off).
I was talking to my dad about it and it turned out that he found a spare blow dryer.
He tucked it away in the spare room for me to use this morning on mom's hair.
With how much mom's been missing her blow dryer, you would've thought that she'd be ecstatic to see me walk in the bathroom with a blow dryer in hand.
It didn't go over exactly as I thought.
To start with, during her shower she continued her mumbled complaints of having no blow dryer, despite me telling her, and even showing her, that I brought my blow dryer over.
When she got out of the shower, she went about her usual routine of applying make up and brushing her hair and I turned the blow dryer on and attempted to brush-dry her hair while she was readying herself.
She didn't seem to notice whatsoever that I had the blow dryer.
In fact, when she was done with what she was doing, she turned and walked herself over to her bed, plopping down and mumbling again about how "he lost my blow dryer"!
For five minutes I waved the blow dryer in front of mom, telling her I brought my blow dryer and coaxing her back over to dry her hair.
She stared back at me with no comprehension in her eyes.
Then, suddenly, she jumped up, looked at the blow dryer for a second before grabbing it from my hand and attempted to dry her hair.
After a couple quick minutes, she turned the blow dryer off so I quickly grabbed it, turned it back on and continued drying her hair for as long as she would let me.
At one point, mom's lips curled down and her eyes became watery as she mumbled something I couldn't understand.
It looked as though she was going to cry.
She's done this quite a few time recently and I'm not sure what to make of it but it appears that she is sad or upset about something.
"What's wrong mom?
What's the matter?"
I asked.
I couldn't understand what she was saying but it hurt my heart to see her visibly upset over something, especially not knowing what I could do to help her.
In the end, we got her hair mostly dry, but to be honest I'm not really sure if she noticed the difference!
I'm not sure if it will click over time or if she will forever mourn the loss of her blow dryer.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, September 18, 2015>
As mom's disease progresses, her routines and rituals continue to change.
One week, we have things figured out.
The next week, everything is disrupted.
One thing that we have learned with this disease is how to be resourceful.
Sometimes you've got to roll with the punches and take it one day at a time.
For so long, mom was so strict on her daily routine: wake at 8 am, take medicine at 8:30, go to the bathroom at 8:35, eat breakfast at 9:00, sit on the bed and wait until shower time at 10 am....you get the point.
Nowadays, there's not a whole lot of rhyme or reason to her day.
She still wakes in the morning (long before 8 am now) and will drink her "slim fast" and take her medicine.
After that, we can't be quite sure what she will do at what time.
We can no longer leave her medicines out all day for her to take at the designated times because she'll take them all at once.
She doesn't shower unless dad or I force her in.
Some nights, she is up at midnight, fixing her sandwich for lunch.
Other times (like today) she eats her lunch at 8:00 in the morning and skipped her afternoon meal.
Sometimes she'll take an hour nap, other times she'll nap for two minutes and then be up again.
We never know what each new day will bring!
One of the things that has been especially helpful for us is mom's love for her computer games.
On her old schedule, she spent a few hours a day in front of her computer.
Nowadays, she will sit down for a few minutes and then be up doing something else before returning to the computer for another minute.
She isn't spending a lot of time in front of the computer, but she is still playing a game or two of spider solitaire each day (I haven't noticed if she still plays the tile game she was playing).
So what does mom do all day?
you might ask.
Well, let me tell you.
All day long, she paces back and forth from her bedroom to the living room.
She walks down the hall, opens the front door and checks to see if the screen door is unlocked.
When she sees that it's locked, she pounds on the door.
If there is a passerby on the street, she will call out, "Hello hello?"
She bounces between the front door and then over to the couch where she hangs over to peer out the window.
She notes whether or not "his" (dad's) truck is there.
If anyone is outside, she will then knock on the window to get their attention.
After doing this back and forth a few times, she then checks the garage door to see if she can get it open.
Of course she can't, so then she usually goes back to her bed where she may rest (with the sheet over her head) for a few minutes, followed by a brief trip to the computer and then back out to the living room once again.
And this is how she passes her time.
EVERY.
SINGLE.
DAY.
I'm thinking that her short term memory has greatly declined now as well.
On the bright side, she is no longer shutting herself in her room all day; everyone gets to enjoy her presence a bit more!
;) This picture was one that I took a couple weeks ago when my dad was working in the front yard.
Dad was never alone while working!
Mom was there, knocking on the window and calling to dad.
She wanted him to put out her night time medicine and at one point she even went to the kitchen and grabbed her glass which she knocked against the window!
Boy, she is persistent!
In other strange news...we took mom to the lab as part of a physical she has scheduled.
She hasn't had her blood checked in a couple of years; we figured we were overdue.
We checked on her lab results today, and as far as I can see, all of her numbers are in the normal range (except her LDL was a little high).
I thought for sure that her peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwich-diet might reflect deficiencies or other health issues (blood sugar, cholesterol, etc) but apparently she is faring well.
It's so strange to me that she can be doing so well physically when her mental capacity is severely altered.
It leaves me to wonder, how long will she have to live with this disease?
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 1, 2015>
I am not my mom's favorite person these days.
Not to say that I ever was.
But I think it's safe to say that she liked me pretty well in the past :)  One of the things that we knew would become an issue with this disease is hygiene.
This was one of mom's strong points in the earlier stages.
In fact, even when mom failed her tests at UCLA, the nurse found the positive for us by saying, "At least she still takes good care of herself and doesn't need help in the area of hygiene."
At the time, I couldn't even imagine mom needing assistance with her grooming because of her rigid routine (which included showering and toileting-at very specific times) and her obsession with her appearance.
Sadly, mom has been losing these abilities little by little over the past several months.
I've written a few posts about her diminishing hair and make up skills and the irregular showering.
Unfortunately, over the matter of a few months, it has gotten to the point where mom will go all week without showering, until she is forced to get in.
Her resistance usually accompanies complaints that she doesn't have enough make-up or a blow dryer (despite the fact that she has both).
She doesn't want to mess it all up since she feels she doesn't have what she needs to make herself presentable after the shower.
My dad never complains and rarely asks for help with anything other than supervising mom.
He leaves the tougher jobs, like grooming, for himself.
After a hard day at a labor intensive job, I know the last thing he wants to deal with is having to forcefully get my mom into the shower.
Not to mention that by showering her at night often disorients her into thinking it's morning time (which means dad gets little sleep at night!)
He is out the door early in the morning, oftentimes before mom is even awake, so showering her in the morning is tough as well.
I decided to make it part of my job and (hopefully) take some of the weight off of dad's back.
Over the past couple of weeks, we've implemented a new showering routine for mom.
Every other day, mom gets her shower, whether she likes it or not (I would say not).
Of course it isn't as easy as simply telling her to get in the shower.
It was tricky at first, but I've pretty much got it down now.
Sad to say, but we actually have to remove her clothing from her (she won't do it herself), much like with a little child, to cue her that it's shower time.
Some days she will plop her body down on the bed and I have to pull her pants off while lifting her body (that's a good work out!)
Other times I can get her into the bathroom first and remove her clothes there.
Once I manage to get her clothing off, she usually protests and sits herself firmly down on the toilet, waiting for me to go away.
I pretend to leave and crack the door shut; she stands back up, poking her head out the bathroom door to see if I'm gone, and that is when I take my opportunity to guide her into the shower, disallowing her to sit down again (sometimes that results in a naked bear hug as I move her into the shower!)
The other day, no sooner did I start taking off mom's shirt than she lamented, "I don't want you here, I wish you weren't here!"
Later that day, while visiting her sister, she mumbled complaints to Ellen about how I shouldn't "see her naked or plain Jane."
I know I am not her favorite person these days but that's okay.
It doesn't hurt my feelings.
I know that the "real" mom, lost deep inside her somewhere, appreciates all that we do as a family to care for her and keep her as comfortable as possible in her own home.
I'm not writing this post for sympathy or for praise.
As much as I hate what this disease has done, I am happy to help my mom.
I do not resent that [help] in the least.
Neither am I doing anything that millions of other unpaid, family caregivers do day in and day out.
Unfortunately, this is a part of life (I would've been happier to deal with it much later in life!)
and there are many other families who suffer far worse with their loved ones.
Lucky for us, mom doesn't have many of the aggression and behavior issues that many people with dementia suffer from.
I don't know if it will come later on, but I'll be happy if we skip that part!
The only thing I do regret is making mom feel uncomfortable.
While I know that it's become necessary to assist with her bathing, I know she doesn't like me seeing her in the nude.
I feel bad about it and try to look away when I can but there's really no way around it.
So it goes with dementia. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 24, 2015>
Last Friday night, we had our first "big" event for The DEANA Foundation.
It was a "Karaoke For a Cause" night and we hosted it at an adult daycare facility in Riverside.
I'm feeling so good about the results of this fundraiser that I wanted to share about it with you all!!
To start with, my favorite part of the whole night was being able to recognize and honor my mom.
Even though she wasn't there physically, I was able to share with our guests about the woman who has inspired this foundation.
It felt great to share some things about my mom and the woman she once was; the person she really is.
It's important to me that my mom is remembered-not just for her strange and quirky behaviors from dementia.
We were privileged to have some special guests in attendance: two City Councilmen (one who is retired and one who currently serves Riverside county) as well as Riverside's Chief of Police.
They were very happy and supportive of the mission we are trying to accomplish.
City Councilman Chris MacArthur even got up and gave some remarks, thanking us for our work.
It felt amazing to have their support!
We had a good turn out and all of our guests had a great time.
The food was good; our DJ was awesome and kept the party alive.
I was surprised at how many people actually got up and did karaoke!
There were some really great entertainers in our crowd.
We started the karaoke portion off with an opening performance.
Our VP (Melissa) my friend (Mickelle) and myself dressed up and sang a song.
My good friend, Ember, helped us to rewrite the lyrics to The Spice Girl's "Wannabe" to go along with our purpose for the night.
It was silly and a lot of fun.
(You can see the video on our facebook page).
So now for the important (and exciting) update.
While our numbers haven't been confirmed yet, I can tell you that we raised well over $1,000 that night, which I would say is awesome for our first big event like this!
In addition to that money raised, Care Connexxus awarded our foundation a grant that we can award to a family to give them a week of free adult daycare at their facility.
Combined with the other money we have raised throughout the year, we are ready to start awarding our caregiving grants this fall!!
I am feeling really excited about this!
We still have lots of room to grow, but considering we've really only been off the ground and running for about 7 months now, I think this is a very big accomplishment.
We anticipate our attendance to double next year and our supporters are already asking about our next event (stay tuned!)
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 17, 2015>
A couple of weeks ago, my adopted-daughter got married.
There was a wedding and reception here in California, followed by a reception in Colorado the following week (where my new son-in-law is from).
My Aunt and cousins live in the same Colorado town as Cameron, so between wedding receptions, we drove out to Colorado and vacationed with family while supporting Maurina and Cameron with their family and friends out there.
Needless to say, the past few weeks have been super busy, fun, stressful, exciting...such a mix of emotions!!
My heart is so happy when I look at this beautiful picture.
I love my family.
It goes without saying that I missed my mom terribly through this whole affair.
My thoughts were turned her frequently and her absence was felt in our hearts.
It had been nearly two weeks since I'd seen my mom before my return last week.
I wouldn't say that there has been a huge difference in the time that has lapsed, but there seems to be a steady decline week by week.
My dad and I were talking the other day about some things that my mom used to fuss over that she no longer pays any interest to.
I thought I'd write some of them down, just to mark her progression.
-Mom no longer asks about dyeing her hair.
I think that concept is totally gone.
She doesn't even talk about needing her hair cut!
She used to fuss about having every hair in place as well; most days it looks as if she hasn't even brushed her hair (although I see the efforts being made...she has just lost that skill).
-Mom is losing concept of time and isn't so rigid on her routine.
She still does things in "sections" of the day (morning, afternoon, evening) but aside from eating lunch at 12:00 and dinner at 4:30 (even that can slightly vary) she isn't strictly adhering to a schedule.
She might nap at 1:00 on one day and 12:00 on another.
I find her in bed often, as a matter of fact.
She seems more restless these days and bounces around all day from bed to computer, to peering out the front door or window and devising a way to escape.
Some days she will take her medicine at the wrong times as well.
It isn't too much of a problem since most of her meds are supplements anyway, but a few times she has dropped a pill on the floor and it wasn't discovered until later.
-She will go longer and longer between shower days, to the point where we've now decided to set a shower schedule.
On those days, either my dad or I will see that she gets through the shower.
She resists and it takes a little force to get her in, but once she's in she knows mostly what to do (even though she uses half a bottle of shampoo every time!!)
-I've noticed that mom isn't using her Bath & Body Works spray anymore.
Just a few months ago she was using a few dozen sprays every morning while getting ready (no exaggeration).
She still uses the shower gel to wash her hands and moisturize her face (yes, you read that right), but I don't see or smell the body spray anymore.
Furthermore, I haven't heard her nag my dad about going to Bath & Body Works in a couple months.
I didn't realize that until I started typing.
I bet the gals at the store are missing their sales ;) -Mom's speech is continuing to decline.
I've been pretty good at deciphering what she says, but even I am having trouble understanding what she says.
I can usually pick out a word or two of what she's saying and make sense of which topic she's speaking of, but there are some times where I am completely confused at what she is trying to tell me.
-Mom still likes her walks, although the only place she ever goes is her sister's house or the Avon lady/friend up the street (I haven't been hearing about her as much the past few weeks though).
She used to sprint up the street when we let her out to go walking.
Her pace has slowed considerably.
She can now sprint only a couple houses before she starts panting.
Remarkably, she still insists on walking and getting her exercise, but she makes frequent stops and is panting and sweating by the time she will resign to getting in the car.
It makes me nervous to let her walk too far for fear that she'll collapse, so we always have a car following behind to pick her up when she tires.
And there you have it-an update of the changes over the past few months. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 29, 2015>
When I was a kid, my mom found a card with my name on it and the meaning written beneath it.
It read: "Cassandra Helper of Mankind" She always told me that the meaning of my name fit me perfectly; that I was the kind of person to help others.
I don't know how well I've really lived up to my name, but I can say that I do try to help others and spread some goodness wherever I go.
Maybe I've subconsciously had it rooted in me because of my mom's opinion of me.
Some people may think I'm a little bit crazy for starting The DEANA Foundation.
Some frequently asked questions include: "Don't you have enough on your plate?"
"Shouldn't you be putting more of your energy into your mom rather than a foundation?"
"How does this benefit your parents (mom specifically)?"
These are probably all fair questions and they are all questions I have asked myself.
Sometimes I wonder why I take on these ambitious project9s.
Why can't I just be "normal" like the other moms around me and spend my time volunteering at the kid's school, or join the PTA?
(By the way, this was always my plan as a mom).
I am always second guessing myself and I've spent many hours pondering these questions.
These are some of my conclusions.
1.
"Don't you have enough on your plate?"
*Yep, I have a lot on my plate.
I always do; that's a part of life.
Just when you think things are going to calm down, something else comes up.
I'm the kind of person that likes to stay busy.
I don't spend much time in front of the TV; I like to be productive with my time.
I will always have a lot on my plate.
*It isn't something I can really put into words, but I feel inclined to do something in the face of the disease.
Early on, before I started writing this blog, I felt the need to be proactive in the dementia community.
Being involved keeps my mind busy and gives me a focus.
It's easy to sit back and let the sadness and despair consume me; I feel so helpless with my mom and in some way this makes me feel like I'm doing something.
2.
"Shouldn't you be putting more of your energy into your mom rather than a foundation?"
*I feel like being involved in this cause and in this foundation actually helps me to put my energy and focus into my mom, rather than away from it.
I am reminded how much my dad needs support and I try my best to be there for him and my mom.
There aren't many times of the day that my mom isn't at least in the back of my mind.
I think it also helps to bring our caregivers and our community together and more aware.
*One day, my mom will no longer be here.
That is a sad reality that we've had to face; we lose her little by little, more and more each day.
When she is gone, there will come an emptiness.
Even though there's an emptiness now, I still devote a lot of time and energy to taking care of her.
I need something to keep me going when she is gone.
I don't want her to be forgotten.
I feel like this foundation is a good way to honor her and keep her memory alive.
I hope it's inspiring and encouraging for my dad to see how many people support and love my mom.
3.
"How does this benefit your parents (mom specifically)?"
*There are no guarantees that this will benefit my dad and mom.
I didn't start this foundation with selfish intent.
Nevertheless, my dad is free to apply for a grant just as any other family is able to.
He will go through the process and our board members will vote on who receives what amount of money.
Our goal is to help as many families as possible; certainly he isn't exempt.
*My family is not the only family suffering.
Who knows if one day I or one of my children could be affected?
Aren't we all here to help each other??
I struggle daily with self-doubt.
I harbor the fear of failure.
I want this foundation to succeed.
I want my mom's name and legacy to be remembered.
I want to help other people who are suffering from this heartbreak.
I want to live up to what my mom always thought of me, to be a "helper of mankind."
With all of that said, I do want to invite all of my readers to check out our foundation website.
It is actually getting a professional make over right now, so if you check back next week it will look different (and way better!!).
Our foundation needs help to give help.
If you feel inclined to join the cause and help others on this journey, there are many ways to help, whether near or far.
For my local readers, we have a foundation charity event coming up on August 21st.
It is going to be an evening of fun with dinner, karaoke, some magic, and raffle prizes.
I'm posting the flier here and you can also visit our facebook page and website.
Tickets must be bought in advance in order to plan for food (deadline is August 17th).
You can buy them on our website's "shop" page or through me personally.
Thank you to all who continue to support our family and The DEANA Foundation!
To visit The DEANA Foundation, please click here.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, July 24, 2015>
I've been fighting myself all day about writing this post.
It's hard to share some things that are so personal and private and I don't want to shame my dad in any way (although he has nothing to be ashamed about).
Maybe I shouldn't write anything, but then I wouldn't be sharing the whole journey: the not-so-good, the bad and the ugly.
Today was an ugly.
It was the kind of day any caregiver would dread and I was fuming for the better part of the day.
It started when I stopped by my dad's to drop something off for my Aunt, who watches my mom on Friday mornings.
My dad was supposed to be gone, but his truck was parked almost midway down the driveway with his front end hanging a couple feet into the street, which I thought was odd.
I walked up to the porch and noticed a white car parked across the street that I didn't recognize.
As the kids and I reached the doorstep, I pulled my house keys out and went to unlock the deadbolt only to discover that the screen door (which is always kept locked to prevent mom from running out) was not only unlocked, but cracked open.
Strange, I thought.
In a quick instant I wondered if something was going on and when I opened the door I walked in to find two women, standing in the living room and talking to my dad, who was sitting on the couch.
One of the women was holding a clipboard and after only a few seconds of listening to the conversation, I knew they were talking about my mom.
I looked over to my Aunt Claudia, who was also sitting on the couch, and gave her a questioning look, wondering what this was all about.
She mouthed the words "social workers" to me.
Weird, I thought, crinkling my nose.
I left the room, while they continued talking, to check on my mom in her bedroom.
Nothing seemed out of the ordinary in there.
When I returned to the living room, the social workers were finishing up their visit and said good-bye to my dad.
As soon as they left, I turned to my dad.
"What was that all about?"
I asked him.
"Well, it seems somebody called Adult Protective Services on me," he said, matter-of-factly.
My jaw dropped and I couldn't even find words to respond.
It made no sense.
Who would do such a thing?
Why would someone call and cause trouble for my dad?
And most of all, what could they possibly have reported??
When I finally found my voice to ask my dad these questions, he replied that the social workers were not allowed to tell who made the call or why.
All they could tell him was that *someone* called because they were "concerned" about his wife.
The social workers checked in on my mom and talked to my dad, who had nothing to hide.
He answered each question honestly and opened up about some of the struggles we've faced.
They talked to him about the option of putting my mom in a facility; my dad told them it was out of the question.
In the end, I think they were satisfied with all of my dad's answers and could see that he is doing his best to take care of his wife; they didn't say anything about a follow up but I don't really know what the procedure for that sort of thing is (if they would tell him or not) but I fear this has opened a door to social workers now breathing down our necks and watching our every move.
Let me just tell you how I felt when he shared this information with me.
You know what they say about Mother Bear Claws?
It was something similar to that.
How dare somebody call Adult Protective Services on my dad!!
My dad loves my mom more than we even know.
I can see it in his everyday actions for her; working hard to find a way to keep her at home where she is comfortable, keeping her happy with her pb&j; sandwiches and "slim fast" and Bath & Body Works; buying her endless supplies of make-up and following after her on her walks; disabling hot wires of her blow dryer just so that he doesn't have to take the blow dryer away from her completely (she loves that blow dryer!
); switching out her non fat milk to almond milk in an effort to get her something more nutritious and easier on her stomach (talk about a pain in the neck!
)...these are just a few of the great lengths that my dad goes to for my mom to see that she is safe and happy.
If my dad didn't love and care about my mom so dang much, he would've put her in a home a long time ago.
None of us are perfect and this is a hard, untraveled road that we find ourselves going down.
Mistakes may be made, but make no mistake about her well-being; mom is getting the best care possible at this time.
At the end of the day, people may disagree with the way we deal with things, but it is nobody's business!!
I've spent most of the day stewing over this issue.
I can't figure out who would do such a thing.
I would hate to think it could be any of our caregivers or family members.
Most of the immediate neighbors know my parents.
If there was any concern, why would somebody think they need to address it with Adult Protective Services?
I've tried to think that maybe it really was out of concern for my mom but let's face it, calling APS is a chicken move!
If there's any concern, they could have talked to my dad.
Instead, this person has added even more stress into my dad's life because now, whether he realizes it or not, APS is going to be checking in on him, watching for any and every little mistake; this is what worries me the most.
Until someone has had to care for their loved one with dementia, they don't understand it-not social workers, not therapists, not doctors.
The last thing a caregiver needs is someone breathing down their neck and feeling that they aren't doing a good enough job.
So, for the person who called APS and to everyone else reading this post, let me say it loud and clear: MY DAD IS DOING A GREAT JOB CARING FOR MY MOM!!
I admire him greatly and have learned many lessons of love from him.
There's nowhere else that my mom could be where she would be better taken care of or loved more than with my dad.
So...if anyone has a problem, either brave up and bring your concerns to my dad, or go away! 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 20, 2015>
Yesterday was a bittersweet day.
Sweet because it was my niece, Raelynn's baptism day.
Bitter because our family wasn't whole.
Baptisms are special events in our families and our religious culture.
As a family, we are always there for each other for these important life events.
Of my parent's 12 grandchildren, 6 have been baptized; Raelynn was grandchild #7.
She is also the first grandchild baptism that my mom has not attended.
The last two were baptized two years ago and even though mom was struggling with her dementia, she still went to church most Sundays and understood the special ordinances that were taking place.
She was excited and happy for these occasions and for those of you who have been reading my posts from the beginning, you may remember that mom was even a bit obsessed with God and church for a while.
It was one of her favorite things to talk about...over and over and over!
I can't tell you the last time mom has mentioned anything about church.
It's been well over a year since she's attended church.
She had no understanding of Raelynn's special day whatsoever.
Her absence was noticed and felt by all of us.
When we took our picture together in the hall, as we have with each baptism, I felt sad realizing that this was the first (but not the last) baptism that mom has missed.
Several of us noted that grandma wasn't there.
She's missed so much over the past couple years-particularly the past year.
Yet we've only just begun.
My mom won't be there for my other two boy's baptisms, or for any of her grandkid's high school graduations or weddings or baby showers.
Her presence will always, always be missed. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 6, 2015>
Last week, my dad flew out to his home state of Connecticut, with his 4 sisters, to attend their cousin's wedding and have a little family reunion.
He was gone for 8 days and 7 nights.
It was a very much needed break for him and I'm really glad he got to go.
I know he worries leaving mom behind, but he knows that he can count on us to help him out.
I've watched mom plenty of times in the past when dad has gone out of town.
We have the usual routine of caregivers during the day and between my sister, her husband, my husband and myself, we rotate turns spending the night.
I'm finding it a bit more difficult as her disease progresses.
She is to the point now where she needs some help getting into the shower, so that was one of our jobs while dad was out-making sure she showers.
It's not an easy thing to have to disrobe your parent and force them into a shower.
The first time I had to do that, I really felt like I was violating her in some way.
The first time is the hardest.
After that, you learn what is necessary to do and you just learn to it.
It's probably more difficult emotionally than anything else.
It's hard to put into words all the emotions that I felt during this week of caring for mom, but I was glad that I was able to come over and help my mom (and dad).
While it's been difficult to have to take on a parent role with my mom, there were some tender moments as well.
One night, mom was laying in her bed and I went to lay down beside her, just to keep her company (and maybe for my own comfort as well).
She was mumbling that her face hurt.
She hasn't been washing it well and I discovered that she is using her body wash as a facial moisturizer; needless to say her skin is dry and peeling.
I knew she would fight me, but I decided to try and wipe her face with a cleansing cloth.
At first, she protested and pulled her sheet over her head and began laughing hysterically, which made me start laughing as well.
Eventually, she let me finish wiping her face as the dead skin wiped off in the cloth.
I brought over her face moisturizer and began rubbing it into circles on her face.
She initially started swatting my hand away, but she finally calmed down.
She laid her head back and closed her eyes as I rubbed the moisturizer into her thirsty skin.
For a quick minute, I thought she might have even enjoyed the nurturing.
There were definitely ups and downs of the week.
I felt a huge weight of responsibility on my shoulders while my dad was gone.
Even though I had help from other people, ultimately I felt the most responsibility for her.
I was in charge of coordinating the caregiving schedule so I had to worry if people would show up or not and fill in when people cancelled at the last minute (which I usually do every week anyway, but not 24/7).
It's no different than being a parent; your children are on the forefront of your mind constantly, and that's how it was with my mom.
But with the responsibility of caring for someone also comes a growing love for that person.
My heart swells with love for my mom.
It is so hard to balance my family and kids and all of my other life responsibilities and I'm not perfect.
By Thursday night, I admit I did have a little bit of a meltdown and was feeling discouraged.
But I think that comes with the territory of caregiving.
Caregiving is hard and it takes a lot out of you, and there are times that you have those meltdowns, but it doesn't change your love for the person.
It made me realize and appreciate more of the weight that my dad carries around with him every day.
I am really glad that he was able to have such a fun week with his family; it is well deserved.
I feel impressed to say one more thing; someone made a comment to me that I want to address.
It was insinuated that I write about things to put it out there and show off to everyone what I do for my mom.
That insinuation really hurt my feelings.
It's often difficult to write the things that I do and I hesitate sometimes to do it.
And I've always had the personality that worries what people will think (though I'm learning, with age and experience, to get over that).
I write for a few different reasons: to educate about the disease, to help others in their journey and because writing is therapeutic for me.
People leave me very kind comments which I appreciate, but it sometimes makes me uncomfortable because I really don't feel like there's anything extra special about what I'm doing.
I think it is what anyone would do.
I do not write to seek praise or to get a pat on the back, simply to share our journey with others.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 30, 2015>
I remember my mom telling me a story about my twin brother.
We were small kids; probably about 3 or 4 years old.
Somehow,  Joe had climbed up onto the counter and gotten into the Dimetapp cough syrup.
I don't remember how much she said that he drank, but I remember her recounting her panic and calling the doctor right away.
Luckily, my brother was fine and suffered no side effects from getting into the medicine.
Today, I took my kids to the beach.
I was due back at my mom's this evening because I am watching her overnight for my dad.
Of course we hit some traffic on the way home and I was running a bit behind.
I called my brother-in-law, Melvin, to see if he could come sit with her until I got the kids home and fed; he willingly came over.
I didn't even think to tell him to put out mom's nighttime medicine because I knew I'd be there long before it was medicine time.
Plus, I thought that my dad was waiting a little longer to put her nighttime medicine out because she was getting a little mixed up and taking them sooner than she was supposed to.
Well...this was almost a dangerous mistake I made.
As you probably know from some of my other posts, mom is obsessed with her medicine.
She paces around all day asking for it and by 6:00 this evening, when her pill container didn't show up on the counter, she was getting a bit of anxiety.
Melvin saw her go into the kitchen; he was sitting on the couch watching TV.
He saw her walk around the corner by the fridge and suddenly heard her laughing.
When he went to check on her, he found empty bottles of Pamprin and Allegra beside her and a cup in her hand, ready to get water from the fridge.
He saw her mouth full of pills and, thankfully, was able to retrieve them out of her mouth...all 31!!
Of course I felt a little panicked when Melvin called to tell me this.
Thank goodness she laughed her mischevious little laugh, and thank goodness Melvin got up to check on her!
I feel horrible that this happened under my watch (while dad is gone).
Needless to say, I packed up everything that even resembled medicine capsules and put them in a safe place for dad to sort through when he gets back. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, June 26, 2015>
Summer is here and I've been absent from my blog again.
I've been trying to keep a steady balance of keeping the kids busy, helping with my mom (and filling in for caregivers who are gone, including my dad!
), working for The DEANA Foundation, keeping up on household responsibilities (a never ending and all consuming task), running to and from swim practice and meets, and working on my new "calling" for church.
Oh, and did I mention that my niece-daughter is getting married next month?
Yes, I've been planning a wedding as well.
My plate is definitely full but those of you who know me, know that I wouldn't have it any other way.
At least I never have time to be bored!
;) A couple of years ago, when I started my Mondays with mom, I wasn't very excited about bringing my kids along with me during their summer break.
I was worried that they would be bored or complain about having to give up parts of their vacation to come and sit with grandma.
Oh how my perspective has changed!
It's true that we've had to turn down some play groups in order to keep our commitment to being with mom on Monday.
And I'm sure there are other places they'd rather be.
Don't get me wrong-if it were a perfect world, my mom wouldn't be suffering with this horrid disease and, consequently, we wouldn't be spending every Monday caring for her.
Rather, we would be planning fun summer outings with her!
But over the past couple of years, I have learned to appreciate and value the time that we spend here with her.
There are definitely days when they get bored and drive me nuts.
But even they are learning to appreciate that Mondays are the day we take care of grandma.
My daughter, Aubrey, is a very compassionate soul.
Many people know her feisty, spirited side but don't always get to know this loving, sweet side of her, which I adore.
Oftentimes I overhear her talking to her brothers about how much grandma loved them, how she used to be so excited to be a grandma (sentiments that I've shared with her).
I hear her and her brothers wishing away the dementia.
Sometimes, she will be the leader in picking a chore to help grandpa around his house (not sure if he ever notices).
Lately, I've been observing Aubrey's interactions with my mom and it warms my heart.
Every time we come over, she now tells grandma "hi" and gives her hugs.
My mom never hugs her back or responds (unless it is to brush her away) but Aubrey understands that it is the disease causing her to behave that way.
I encourage her to keep on hugging grandma and telling her she loves her anyway.
My boys are not quite as affectionate as my girl, but now and then they will follow big sister's example and give grandma hugs and "I love you's."
This morning, I went into my mom's rom and lay beside her on her bed.
I often do this; she usually hides from me underneath her sheet and begins rambling about how dad doesn't support her with money and credit cards, followed by promptings for me to leave her room because, "You can't see me napping."
I let her ramble.
I just like to be next to her.
I know everyone says she's not my mom anymore; that the person she once was is gone.
And I'm not in denial about it.
Yet, sometimes it gives me comfort to just lie beside her and hug her.
Sometimes she will push me away, other times she will laugh at me, and many times she will simply ignore my affections altogether.
Today, while I was laying beside her, my sweet daughter came into the room and mimicked what I was doing.
She laid down next to grandma and gave her a big hug, saying, "I love you grandma."
For the next little while, we sat beside my mom, giving her hugs and listening to her ramble; Aubrey repeating her "I love you's."
There are many times when I feel like I am messing up on this whole parenting thing.
But moments like these, when I see the love my children have developed for their grandma, despite their lack of knowing the "real" grandma, warms my heart and gives me encouragement.
I'd give anything to have my mom back; since that isn't going to happen, I continue to look for the opportunities to teach my kids of love, service and compassion.
I can't think of a better way to spend our Mondays!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 1, 2015>
One of the hardest things about dealing with this disease is coming to terms with the role reversal which it brings.
As my mom's abilities become less and less, we have to step in to do more and more for her.
With every forced clothing change or face and hand wash after lunch or assistance in the bathroom, I feel like I am ripping her dignity away from her; especially when she tells me, "I'm your mom, you should support me."
Deep down I know that I am doing the right thing and taking care of her the best that I can.
Still, I feel as if I am disrespecting- and in some instances violating-my mom.
I can only imagine how my dad must feel.
Today was probably the toughest in this aspect that I've faced in a while.
It wasn't just one thing that I had to play mom for today.
It was several.
It started when I first arrived to her house.
Dad had warned me that mom's make-up has gotten dramatically worse over the past few days.
I didn't think that was possible but sure enough, mom had globs of make up on her face when I walked in her room.
I can assume that she poured a bottle of foundation in her hands and then smeared it all on her face, without rubbing any of it in.
It was wet and runny and gloppy.
I got some toilet paper and wiped her face in sections, with her swatting my hand away in between each section.
I had to wait until she was distracted with brushing her hair to quickly rub some more of the residue off her face.
Mom's been so antsy lately to get out of the house.
Unfortunately, she doesn't get out often because she is difficult for a lot of her caregivers to manage.
I don't mind taking her out; I usually feel like I can handle it (although it's getting harder and harder when I have my 4 year old sidekick in tow).
I knew mom wanted to go to her sister's, so I told her that I would take her.
She really wanted to get exercise and I kept repeating to her that she could walk up to the top of the street and then get in my car.
The instant that front door was unlocked, mom plowed through the door and sprinted up the street.
I quickly got my son and myself in the car and followed after her (thankfully she used the sidewalk this time).
By the time she got to the top of the street, her sprint had turned into a shuffle and she was panting quite hard.
I urged her to get in the car and she did.
When she was ready to leave her sister's house, she was insistent again on walking.
My Aunt lives on a busy street and I am not comfortable with mom walking to the end of the street alone as she tends to walk in the middle of the street now.
My Uncle helped me block the door so that I could get a good hold on her arm before she darted out the door.
I practically had to drag my mom to the door (she was trying to drag me to the street) and my Uncle and I finally got her in the front seat, buckling her seat and closing the door.
But mom is mischevious.
As soon as I began walking around the car to get to my side of the car, she unbuckled her seat and darted out the door.
My Uncle caught her and I decided it would be safer to put her in the back seat with the child lock on.
I tried to get her seatbelt on, but she kept taking it off.
Unfortunately, we drove the mile home without her seatbelt fastened, but the child locks prevented her from getting out (she reminded me, also, to lock the windows!!)
I forgot to mention that in the process of getting her into the car, she spilled her opened can of root beer (which she keeps in her purse) ALL over my car.
Ugh.
Once we were at home and mom went back to her room, I tried to get her to change her pants.
She had root beer and jelly all over pants but of course didn't understand the need to change clothes.
I knew she'd make a big mess everywhere she went, and especially on her bed, with her pants in that condition so I tried to take control of the situation and change her pants.
That meant pulling down her pants and physically fighting her to get them off.
This is where I feel as if I'm violating my mom.
Sometimes I just don't know if I'm doing the right thing when I have to be forceful with her, especially when it violates her privacy.
As I was trying to change her, I made a strange discovery.
Mom had on no underwear beneath her pants.
I'm not sure how she missed that step in getting dressed, but poor mom forgot to put them on (I have no idea if this is a first or not).
Furthermore, I discovered that both her undershirt and her bra were on backwards.
I have to admit I chuckled a little bit at that one; sometimes I don't know whether to laugh or cry so to keep my sanity I try to find the humor.
After being pushed and kicked at, I lost the battle with changing mom's clothes.
She's a lot bigger than me nowadays and while I am pretty good at restraining her from running into the street, I am no match against her at clothes changing time.
Thankfully, my dad came home around noon in between appointments and was able to change her.
It really amazes me how he is able to just get in and get the job done.
I'm not sharing any of this to embarrass my dear mom; it's not really her I'm writing about.
It is the disease.
Still, I debated if I should post about this or not (particularly the underwear issue); there are a lot of things that I opt not to write about because it feels too personal.
I do feel a little bit of guilt for exposing some other personal situations.
But I want people to understand the real challenges of this disease.
Dementia isn't only losing memories; it's losing all abilities.
It's so much worse than portrayed in movies like "The Notebook".
It's an ugly, horrible disease that rips away all dignity.
I have readers who have written to me and shared that my blog has helped them to know what to expect from their loved one who is stage(s) behind my mom; I write this for them as well.
It's not easy to see what lies ahead, but knowledge is power and preparations (mentally and physically) help a lot in the management of disease.
And I suppose I also needed to share some of my thoughts for my own therapy.
I try to be optimistic and find humor when I can.
Overall I'd like to think I'm pretty good at keeping positive and being strong.
But today left me feeling really down for some reason and I felt like I needed to write to get some of these feelings off my chest.
There are days when I feel like I'm not ready to lose my mom (physically) quite yet, and other days where I wish that she could leave this earth before the rest of her dignity is completely gone.
I hate what this disease has done to her.
Dementia is a beast.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 18, 2015>
I'm a week late in posting this, but last Monday (the 11th) was mom's birthday.
I wanted to blog about it, but I've been pretty busy and to be honest, I didn't have anything too positive to say.
It was a bit of a disappointment, to say the least.
We all knew that mom would probably not remember her birthday; afterall, the last birthday she remembered was last summer and she didn't understand Mother's Day (or any other holiday).
So you'd think we would be prepared for the disappointment.
Nevertheless, we thought-whether she understood her birthday or not-we would take her out to the mall and let her shop to her heart's delight at Bath & Body Works (followed by dinner at her favorite place, Miguel's).
Mom has been extremely antsy to get out of the house lately, so we figured she'd jump on the chance to go out to the mall.
We prepped her days in advance of our shopping plans with seemingly no comprehension on her part.
Then, on Sunday, she surprised us all by saying that dad was taking her to the mall "tomorrow".
We felt optimistic that she has grasped something we had said.
But the optimism was short lived.
I arrived at her house at 4:00 on her birthday to help my dad get her ready to go to the mall.
To make a long and tiring story short, mom couldn't understand what we were trying to get her to do.
I brought the kids in to sing Happy Birthday to her, but they may as well have sang it to the wall for the response they got from their grandma.
I thought the tune might-just maybe-spark a memory in her.
We showed her her bottles of body lotion, stating that we wanted to take her to get more.
Nothing.
Mom sat on her bed and fixated her attention to the clock, waiting for it to turn to 4:30 which would allow her to go and eat her pb&j; sandwich for dinner.
We tried for more than half an hour to get her out the door until we finally resigned our efforts.
I could tell that my dad felt let down and our moods all shifted from hope and optimism to sadness and defeat.
If there is anything positive that we can say about mom's birthday, it is that we had a show of love and support from our friends and family.
We had set up a fundraiser for The DEANA Foundation, honoring it's namesake's birthday, at-where else?-Miguel's Jr.
Throughout the day, I received texts, pictures and posts from friends who were dining at Miguel's and wishing my mom a happy birthday.
I can't tell you how much that means.
Though my mom's memory fades, the memory of the person she once was will forever live on.
(The top picture was taken when I was delivering my first baby in 2005.
The second picture was taken on Mother's Day; it's a blurry shot but that's all we can get these days).
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 7, 2015>
About a month ago, I wrote a post about another turn that mom had made in this disease.
The problem was that mom had been waking up at night completely disoriented, thinking it was day time.
Consequently, during the day she slept, thinking it was night.
It was after some detective work in my online support groups and a home UTI test that showed up positive that we concluded mom's disruptive routine was the result of a UTI.
I wrote my follow up post, stating that the doctor had ordered a UTI test at the lab and in the meantime had prescribed mom some antibiotics because it did sound as if she had a UTI.
She started the antibiotics and soon after had gotten back into her regular routine.
We were confused, however, when the lab results came back a few days later, negative for a UTI.
The doctor figured she must've had some other sort of infection that the antibiotics cleared up, thus getting her back into her routine.
So here we are, a month later, finding ourselves in the same situation, yet again.
For the past week mom has been very disoriented with time.
She's been up showering at midnight, making peanut butter and jelly sandwiches at 4:00 in the morning and playing on her computer at random times of the day and night.
She's been keeping my poor dad up at night.
The interesting part is that she doesn't think it's night time during the day.
She might think it's dinner time when it's breakfast, but I haven't noticed her (or heard about from my dad or other caregivers) getting in her jammies and sleeping during the day.
It's almost as if this past week has been one very long, continuous day for her.
Except that she will, on occasion, rinse her hair or put on make-up and do bits and pieces of her routine (only at random times of the day/night).
I can't make sense of it because her entire routine is thrown off.
It's hard to think that it could be another infection (though it's possible), but more likely just the turn we have been fearing-that mom has lost her sense of time. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 5, 2015>
Last week was my dad's birthday.
My sister-in-law, Natalie, and I have been joking since last year that we were going to throw him a "Senior Citizen" party, since he was turning 55 and now eligible for the senior discounts.
The funniest part about it is that my dad doesn't look (or act) like he's 55 in the least.
We thought this was a pretty fun birthday party idea and dad could use a good laugh now and then.
We moved forward with our party plans and last weekend, we threw dad his Senior Citizen Birthday Bash.
Joe and Natalie drove in from Arizona and we invited our family and close friends to celebrate.
The fun people dressed up like senior citizens and we ate good food, laughed, opened presents and played Bingo.
It was a really fun night.
Here are some fun pictures, just to bring a smile to your face.
I laugh every time I look back at the photo of Natalie and me.
With every up there is a down.
We had a fun time getting together and celebrating and it was good for dad to get out (we had a caregiver at home with mom).
Joe doesn't say much, but I know this visit was especially hard for him because it was the first time that mom didn't know him.
Even a few short months ago, at Christmas time, mom connected who her son was-even if she wasn't very social.
This time, she couldn't figure out who he was and kept telling him that he needed to leave.
Joe told me that on day 3, she finally figured out who he was, but continued to tell him that he needed to go home and shouldn't stay.
Other than the usual things mom talks about (her lack of money and credit cards, not being able to drive, etc), Joe wasn't able to understand anything she said.
Her speech is very fast and very slurred.
If we can pick out a few clear words we are able to piece together what she is talking about.
For those who don't see her as frequently (like Joe), it's harder to make sense of what she is talking about.
The next time Joe will be out will likely be in July.
Seeing how it took mom 3 days to know who he was, I wonder if she will even connect the dots at all during their next visit :(
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 6, 2015>
We've been experiencing some warm weather here...and it's barely just spring!
It's been in the 80's and 90's and mom still insists on wearing her thick, fleece jacket for every second of every day.
It's gotten to the point where she has even been sleeping in it.
She cannot make the connection between her severe sweating and her jacket.
Needless to say, it is a concern for us when she goes on her walks in this heat.
She ends up extremely hot and sweaty and refuses to drink water; we are afraid she will overheat herself and pass out.
Try as we might, we cannot peel that jacket off of her!
My dad decided that the jacket needs to disappear.
He was able to take it away one day, either when mom was showering or when she was changing (I'm not sure which).
Of course mom has been frantically searching for her jacket and quite upset that my dad "lost" it.
Not to fear.
She has found ways to improvise.
Each day, we find her with something new worn over her clothes in place of the lost jacket.
It might be a dress, dad's t-shirt (worn inside-out and backwards) or dad's jacket.
But mom is resourceful and creative!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 1, 2015>
After my last post, I wrote a post in my (facebook) FTD online support group.
I was seeking advice on how others have handled these kinds of situations, since I know that night waking is very common in dementia.
Several people on the post suggested that confusion and disruption such as this could be a sign of a urinary tract infection.
Who would've thought??
Never in a hundred years would I have thought that mom's schedule confusion could be attributed to a UTI; she had no fever and no other sign of being sick or in pain.
Nevertheless, after reading all of the comments and suggestions, and reading up on signs of UTI in a person with dementia, I decided we needed to rule out the possibility.
The problem is...how do you get a person to go to the doctor when she thinks it is night and refuses to get out of bed?
Add on to that my dad is overwhelmed with work right now and is shorthanded and all of my kids are home on spring break!
After some investigation work (and thanks to a conversation I remembered having a few weeks ago with a friend about a home test kit for UTI's), I made a trip to the pharmacy and found a home kit for UTI's.
Of course I knew I wouldn't get my mom to pee on a strip for me, so I bought a pan to go underneath the toilet seat.
At 6:20 pm, I returned to my mom's house (from the pharmacy) and put the toilet pan on her toilet.
I went to her bedside and prompted her to get out of bed and go potty.
"No, no you shouldn't be here so early....only at 6:59 I get up to potty...." So, as you can guess, attempts to get her to the toilet failed.
That is, until it was 6:59.
On the dot, mom got up, used the toilet and I pushed my way in to test the strip before she caught on that something was weird in the toilet (she had no clue).
A couple minutes later, the test strip read positive for a UTI.
My dad emailed her doctor and we made plans to get her into either his office or urgent care for today.
Fortunately for us, her doctor read my dad's email early this morning and sent in an order to the lab for a culture test.
Since the culture will take a couple days to process, he prescribed an antibiotic for her to take in the meantime.
A quick trip to the lab and I was able to get her a cup; another quick trip to the pharmacy and I got her antibiotics.
Though she was already tucked in bed when I made it back to her house, I convinced her to take both the antibiotic as well as some Tylenol (she is feeling a little warm now) by telling her that it was a sleep medicine.
The only problem now is waiting for her to get out of bed this "morning" (which is really 6:59 this evening) to go potty and collect her urine sample.
What would we have done without this support group?
We would've never known...until it turned into something more serious.
UTI's, if left untreated, can result in blood infections and can be life threatening.
Hopefully we caught everything in time to avoid anything else too serious.
I am hoping that once the infection is gone, she will be able to get back into her regular routine and her confusion will be lessened.
I suppose only time will tell. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 30, 2015>
Just when we think we have things settled down, we hit another bump in the road.
You can never expect anything to stay the same for too long with this disease.
For the past several months, we've had a new routine that has consisted of two new (paid) caregivers.
We knew that the time would be coming where we may have to replace volunteers; they've been wonderful but my dad is afraid of wearing them out.
Luckily, mom has been so set in her routine that we generally know when caregivers are needed.
For instance, we know that she won't be out of bed until 8:30 and she had her medicine/breakfast/potty routine that she seldom deviates from.
It makes it a little easier for dad to get out the door for work in the morning and not worry for the couple hours before caregivers begin to arrive.
Last week, dad related to me that mom had woken up at midnight, disoriented.
She thought that it was afternoon and went into the kitchen to make her sandwich.
Dad followed her in there, put her sandwich away and took her back to bed.
But she was very unsettled.
For the better part of the night, dad tried keeping mom in bed, blocking her from getting out as she tried to be sneaky and escape.
A couple of times she was successful in her escape and was found in the office, playing on the computer.
She had become disoriented one other time, when they were getting ready to go on vacation last summer.
She woke up in the middle of the night thinking that it was morning and was trying to get ready for their trip.
When dad related the events of the previous night, I was hoping it was just another fluke, as it seemed to be in the summer.
Unfortunately, I don't think that this is a fluke, but rather an advancement of the disease.
It is quite common for people with Alzheimer's/dementia to become disoriented and wake at night; they lose concept of time.
My dad has had a rough weekend with mom.
The disorientation came back.
Mom has been waking up at night and thinking that it is night time in the middle of the day.
Yesterday, we came over for family dinner and I realized that mom never came out of her room at 4:30 for dinner; I thought it strange.
I went back to visit her in the office and it became very apparent that she didn't know what time of the day it was.
She pointed to the time on the computer (it was after 5:30 at this point) and mumbled about how we needed to leave soon so that she could take her nap.
She was convinced that it was afternoon and we left that night, I was a little nervous for what the night would bring for my dad.
I got a text from my dad at 7:08 this morning, asking me when I planned to come over (which is usually 9:00).
After doubling her sleep meds last night, he told me that mom had been up since 5:40 and he was nervous to leave her alone.
She was disoriented and upset because she couldn't find her night time medicine.
I quickly pulled on some sweats and, without a shower, got my kids (who are on spring break) and car loaded to start my day at mom's.
At 7:40 this morning, I found my mom fully dressed, sitting in front of the computer.
"Good morning mom," I said, kissing her on top of her head.
"Why are you here?
You need to go too but why didn't he leave me my night time medicine?
He's not supporting me and giving me my night time medicine," she rambled.
"Mom, it's morning time.
See the sun outside?
That means it's morning.
Here are your morning medicines," I told her, cueing her to look out the blind at the sunshine and showing her the morning bottle of meds.
"I wonder if I can eat early now 'cuz it's not 4:30 yet," she said, waving a finger at the clock which read 7:49.
"I wonder can I eat can I make my sandwich now."
Just then, my dad walked down the hall (on his way out the door for work) and he told mom that she could go eat.
"It's time for your Slim Fast dear, it's breakfast time.
You drink your Slim Fast," he told her.
"Yeah yeah?
I can go eat now too?
I can go make my sandwich now early?"
"You can eat whatever you want," dad answered.
"Oh good oh good!
Oh thank you, thank you!"
she said enthusiastically.
She hopped up from her seat and practically skipped down the hall with a big smile on her face, thanking my dad for "allowing" her to eat early.
Mom sat at the table and began her "dinner" routine of making her pb&j; sandwich, pouring her Root Beer in the glass beside her.
Try as I might, I could not convince mom that it was actually morning and not evening.
I could not convince her to take her morning meds; I even poured them into my hand to show her but she did not see the Sleep Aid medicine, so she could not be fooled into taking her morning pills in disguise as night time pills instead.
So now, here I sit on mom's couch, at 8:50 in the morning.
Mom comes out every 10 minutes or so to poke her head out the window and the garage, looking for dad to bring her her night time medicine.
Right now she is sitting beside me asking repeatedly where he wants, insisting on night time meds.
I don't know how the rest of the day will play out, but I imagine it will be a long day.
And an even longer night for my dad.
I'm not sure how he is going to handle caring for mom all through the night and turn around to do a labor intensive job during the day.
I don't know yet what the answer is.
Maybe-just maybe-mom will get back into her routine, but I know well enough that this is all a part of the disease, and it seems to be changing yet again.
UPDATE: It is 9:50 and mom just came out in her pajamas, looking for dad (and medicine).
Despite looking out the window and seeing the sunshine, she still thinks it's night time :(
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 9, 2015>
It's been a while since mom has dyed her hair.
In fact, you may recall the last hair dyeing fiasco, which resulted in my dad having to hide her hair dye.
I suggested to my dad that maybe it was time to just let mom shine with her gray hairs.
However, mom has been pestering him about her hair dye and I know my dad ultimately just wants to make her happy, and so it was decided that we would try taking mom to her hair dresser to get it dyed (by we I really mean I).
For the past week and a half, my dad and I have been prepping mom for her upcoming hair appointment.
For the past week and a half, mom hasn't taken heed to any of our promptings.
This morning I arrived at her house to find her laying on her bed, waiting for the clock to change, signaling the green light for her to get on with her morning routine.
I urged her to get out of bed and get dressed, telling her again that it was the big day to get her hair done.
She remained in the bed and mumbled about the clock and then continued on with her normal venting about not being supported as a driver.
I took that as a cue.
"Mom, I'm going to drive you today," I said, trying to catch her eye.
"I am going to drive you today.
We are going to get your hair done.
I will support you and be your driver," I said repeatedly.
Finally, mom replied with, "Huh?
Where are you gonna drive me?"
I reiterated that we were going to get her hair done and told her to get dressed.
After she voiced her concern about me seeing her "Plain Jane and naked", I told her I would leave her room so she could get dressed.
A few minutes later, I peeked in on her, only to find her still laying on her bed.
"Come on mom, you need to get up and get dressed so I can drive you."
We continued that conversation for several minutes as she tried to comprehend what I was instructing her to do.
Eventually, by some miracle, mom got herself ready to go and came out of her room saying, "I used to be a good cutter, that girl was a good hair cutter.
I hope she doesn't think I look weird."
After a week and a half of promptings, she finally understood that I was taking her to get her hair done!
We arrived at the hair salon a few minutes early, and Crystal was finishing up with another client.
Mom walked into the salon and very loudly began asking, "Where is she?
Who is she what's her name, gonna cut my hair?"
I showed her that Crystal was still finishing with a client, as all eyes in the salon turned on mom, and she wasn't particularly happy that she had to wait.
Nevertheless, she sat down and waited on the edge of her seat for another 15 minutes until it was her turn.
And then...everything went downhill.
Mom isn't used to having her dyed at the salon, so she couldn't understand what Crystal was doing to her.
"No no, this isn't right, this doesn't look so good," mom said, as pieces of hair were pushed forward (and sticking up) to color the underneath layers of hair.
"You need to dry it...why is it severely wet...no this isn't so good..." Crystal came up with the clever idea to put a glove on mom's hand (after mom repeatedly tried touching her head).
I thought that by putting on a glove it might spark a memory of wearing them when she used to dye her hair, thereby signaling to her that she was getting her hair colored.
No such luck.
Though she sat still for the remainder of the time Crystal colored her hair, she continued to be upset that she wasn't doing it right.
When Crystal was finished with the color, she put a plastic cap on her head in an effort to prevent mom from rubbing dye all over her hands.
"It really needs to set in for about 35 more minutes," Crystal said, with an apprehensive look on her face.
"I mean...we could rinse it out earlier if we have to and it'll still have some color, but the longer the better."
I looked over at mom, who was pulling the cap off her head and reaching for Crystal's blow dryer and brush.
I moved in-between mom and the dryer and tried to distract her with her pb&j; sandwich that I had brought along.
"Look mom, let's have some lunch while we wait.
Look, I brought your sandwich.
Peanut butter and jelly; yum," I said, waving the sandwich in her face.
Mom could not be deterred.
"No I need to go now, let's go.
I need to dry my hair."
Round and round we went for another long 5 minutes- mom trying to rub her head, get ahold of the blowdryer, talk about going home- until I turned to Crystal in defeat.
"Let's just rinse it out.
There's no way I can make her sit here for another half hour."
"Come on mom, let's go wash your hair now," I said, gesturing towards Crystal, who was waiting at the back sink.
Mom did not understand my direction, however, and she wouldn't budge from her seat.
She insisted on drying it before she got up and reached again for the blow dryer.
"No mom, we need to rinse your hair first.
Let's go walk to the back sink.
Crystal will wash your hair and then we can cut it," I coaxed her.
I couldn't grab mom's attention; she was too fixated on her task of getting ahold of the blow dryer, so I had to hold onto her arm and try to pull her up.
"Owe!
No you're hurting me, owe no!"
she wailed, as I pulled her up and out of her seat.
She stubbornly dragged her feet as I clasped arms with her and moved her forward to the sink.
The other ladies in the salon tried not to notice the scene mom was making.
I pretended not to let it phase me.
Crystal looked at me helplessly, with sympathy in her eyes.
Somehow we were able to convince mom to sit down but I had to physically move her head back to start rinsing her head.
"Owe, that hurts, owe," mom continued.
I put my right hand under her neck and cradled her head while Crystal washed her hair.
My left hand laid across the top of her chest and occasionally I had to push her head back down as she attempted to get up (I tried to be as gentle and loving as I could be).
Mom tapped her feet on the ground nervously and she continued to whine that we were hurting her.
We finished after just a few minutes (which seemed much longer!)
and showed mom back to her seat.
She was very apprehensive about going back to the chair, as she was DONE with the whole hair ordeal by this point.
She wanted to go home.
"Mom, she's just going to cut your hair now, see?
She's going to cut your hair," I said, prompting Crystal to hold the scissors to signal our next move.
Begrudgingly, mom sat back to let Crystal cut her bangs.
As soon as they were cut, however, mom went reaching for the blow dryer.
Crystal dried her bangs for her and expressed concern about starting the back.
"If I start it, I'm going to have to finish it," she said.
I told her to go ahead and do a quick job while I attempted to keep mom settled enough for Crystal to finish the job.
But mom was fixated on that darn blow dryer.
She kept reaching for it and Crystal finally told me to go ahead and let her have it while she finished the cut.
I was barely able to hold mom down long enough for Crystal to finish the cut (which Crystal, who is an awesome hair dresser, wasn't too pleased with her not-so-finished job) and then mom was up and taking care of business.
Crystal went to tend to another client (who was waiting to get her foil taken out and was on a time constraint) while mom finished drying her hair and I retrieved my purse.
"Where's her money?
You need to give her money, did you give it to her?"
Mom badgered me about paying Crystal until she saw the bill in my hand.
Exhausted, I handed Crystal her money, thanked her (and her other client) for their patience, and quickly made my way out of there.
Normally, I think I can handle my mom quite well.
But today left me feeling very worn out and defeated.
I want my mom to be happy.
But I can't put myself or her through this again.
On a side note, Crystal did later text me and offered to make a house call the next time mom needs a haircut, which I thought was so nice of her.
I do not think we will be messing around with hair dye anymore. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 20, 2015>
Sometimes, a day spent with mom can be quiet and a little boring.
She rarely comes out to the living room or kitchen anymore, unless it is to retrieve food or medicine.
She keeps herself tucked away in her room or in the computer room.
On those days we sometimes wonder, does she really need someone here at every hour of the day?
And then we have a day like today.
And we are reminded with certainty that mom should not be left alone.
To make a long story short, we had nobody to watch mom this morning.
I found out yesterday that her usual Friday morning caregiver had a last minute doctor's appointment that she had to attend.
Everyone I called had appointments and I had a dentist appointment this morning as well.
And you know how those go...if you don't give a 24 hour cancellation notice, they charge you for the missed appointment.
Mom had told me yesterday afternoon that she didn't want anyone over this morning because she had to wash her hair and take a shower.
So after a few fruitless phone calls and talking with my dad, we (apprehensively) figured she would be okay until I was done with my dentist appointment, at which point I would come by and stay with her.
I breathed a sigh of relief as I walked up to mom's front door after my appointment this morning; both doors were closed and locked.
The last time mom had made an escape, she left the door cracked open.
I assumed she was home.
I let myself in the house, locked the door behind me, set down my things, and got my son settled in.
Then I made my way to the back of the house to see what mom was up to.
The door to the computer room was shut and it was about that time that she would normally be playing her games.
I turned on the knob, expecting it to be locked (as usual) but to my surprise it immediately opened.
Mom's desk chair was empty.
That grabbed my attention right away and as I glanced further down the hall, my heart skipped a beat; mom's bedroom door was wide open (she never leaves her door open when she's in there).
I rushed to her room and as expected, her bed was empty.
I looked in her usual hiding places-the closet, bathroom, alongside her bed.
"Mom?
Mom, where are you?!"
I called, trying not to panic.
When I searched all the rooms in the house and couldn't find my mom, I knew well enough that she had gotten out.
I grabbed my purse and my keys and my son (who was protesting that he hadn't gotten his peanut butter and jelly sandwich yet) and hurried out the front door.
I figured there were only a few places she would have gone: the Avon lady's house (which I would've likely seen her if that was the case, as the Avon lady is at her other job right now and mom would have been walking back home), the grocery store or my Aunt's house.
Being that it is Friday, I turned on the street leading to my Aunt's house.
I made it almost the entire way to my Aunt's house when I finally spotted my mom at the top of the road, wearing her thick, fleece blue jacket and jeans and carrying one purse on each shoulder (one is for her lunch).
[The advantage to mom wearing the same clothes everyday is that she's easy to find or describe in a situation like this!]
She was walking my direction at the top of the street but not in her usual, fast paced sprint.
Instead, her walk looked almost shuffled and she moved slowly, looking around as though she was confused.
When I pulled up closer, I saw that her face was bright red and her make-up was dripping with the sweat on her skin.
I pulled over to the side of the road, put the car park and put on my hazard lights and called to her, "Mom, mom!
It's me, Cassandra.
Your daughter."
She looked confused.
"Ellen, Ellen?
I'm trying to find Ellen's house..."she mumbled, waving her finger in the air.
"Mom it's me, Cassandra," I said, as I approached her.
I put my arm around her and felt her hair, drenched in sweat.
I directed her to the car, repeating to her who I was.
After several seconds, she finally registered that it was me.
"Oh oh, Cassandra?
You're Cassandra?
But I couldn't find Ellen's house-it's so weird-I couldn't find it..." she said (with some other unrecognizable words mixed in here and there).
"I know momma, you shouldn't leave the house alone.
I'm so glad you're okay," I said, helping her inside the car.
She continued her chatter about how she had been looking for her sister's house and it was obvious that she was very flustered and very tired.
My heart hurt as I looked at my poor, confused mom.
I swallowed the lump in my throat and said a silent prayer of gratitude that she was okay.
I took her home and got her settled in (lunch and nap) but despite my efforts, I couldn't get her to take off her jacket or drink any water (although she did take some sips of her root beer).
She complained that she was cold and it was no wonder; her shirt was completely drenched in sweat.
Her eyes were pink and her face still flushed even half an hour later, but I could not get her to cooperate with me to change her clothes or take more than a small sip of water.
For now, she is resting in her bed.
I am very glad that she is safe.
It was a rough reminder that mom shouldn't be left alone.
Next time, I'll just pay the darned appointment cancellation fee!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 18, 2015>
Every now and then I like to give an update on all that is happening with The DEANA Foundation.
I've been working like a mad woman on this foundation.
We've created an official Facebook page and ever since then we've been working really hard on getting our name out there; I feel as though I have another unpaid job.
Ha ha.
But I am so passionate about the cause that it hardly seems like work.
I have an awesome board (4 other members besides myself) who all have strengths that are truly benefitting this foundation.
We are officially an incorporated charity and have filed for our non-profit status (just waiting on the IRS!).
We have a beautiful logo that my cousin, Sam Harrington, designed.
Note that he used my mom's silhouette.
Amazing.
Our official website is up and running.
We have plans to update it, but wanted something in the meantime while we raise enough funds to get it professionally detailed.
The website address is: www.thedeanafoundation.org  We've hosted our first successful fundraiser.
We had a pizza party at a local restaurant and we raised over $500 for our foundation.
I was touched by the show of support from family, friends and our community.
We have already began planning for our big opening event, which I am SO excited about.
We are waiting until we've obtained our non-profit to set a date, but we are aiming for the end of August/beginning of September.
Right now, we have launched a campaign to help really get us up and running.
We have filing fees to cover, our website, insurance to obtain, a venue to book for our "grand" opening event and other overhead costs (business cards, advertising, merchandise for our shop, etc).
It takes a lot to get going, so we've created a campaign on indiegogo.
Basically, we have 40 days to raise $3,000.
We are currently at $400 and have 33 days left.
I made a beautiful slideshow that is featured on our campaign.
If you haven't seen it yet, visit our campaign and click on the "gallery" tab.
You can do that HERE.
We have so many projects and events underway right now...I won't bore you with all of the details, but things really are coming along quite well.
My vision for this foundation is to reach and help families across the globe.
As we are just getting started, we will likely be helping those in our community first (that's where we receive most of our support right now).
BUT, I have plans on how to expand this foundation to reach everyone, and hopefully that will happen very quickly.
It will require some help from others across the country, but I'm happy to report that I already have contacts lined up to help in other states.
Eventually, I want to see different chapters of The DEANA Foundation across the globe, much like the Alzheimer's Association.
It may seem like a big feat, but we will get there, even if it takes us a decade or two to do it!
If anyone is interested in volunteering and helping The DEANA Foundation in any capacity, please contact me or visit our website to learn how!
I want to thank everyone who has been a support to this foundation thus far.
For all of the likes and shares on facebook, the donations, the participation in our first fundraiser...the list goes on.
We could not do this without your help and support and we thank everyone who has contributed to that.
Thank you, from the bottom of my heart!
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 17, 2015>
I was going to write a completely different post today, but my head is in a different place.
So here it goes.
I try not to post a lot of negativity on my blog.
I try to write in a positive, uplifting and encouraging manner.
I try not to let dementia get me down and I try not to feel sorry for myself; there are millions of other people out there who have lost their moms at a young age.
But some days are just harder than others to keep smiling.
Today is just one of those days.
Last night I was a bit emotional over some things, and as I lay in bed holding back the urge to cry, I turned to my husband and said, "I wish I had my mom to talk to.
She would know the right thing to say to me."
There's just something about a mother's love that compares to none else.
My mom was the kind of mom who was always there to lend a listening ear and support.
She would tell me the truth-even if I was in the wrong-but I knew she loved me and I always felt like she had everything figured out.
Sometimes I feel a little lost without her; it's hard to figure things out on my own.
So, for those of you reading this post who still have a mother around, give her a call.
Tell her you love her.
Tell her how much she means to you.
You never know what time you have left, and you never how much that time means until it's gone.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 4, 2015>
The other night I had a dream.
I woke up in the morning, knowing that I had a dream but I couldn't remember exactly what it was.
I felt really bothered because the memory of it was right there, sitting at the back of my mind; I had a slight feeling that I knew what it about.
But try as I might, I couldn't pull that memory to the forefront.
I could not remember what I had dreamt.
It was such a strange feeling- to have the sense that I knew what my dream was about, but unable to retrieve that memory.
The thought hit me: I wonder if this is how my mom feels?
Does she hear background noise, words in conversations around her, and have the sense that she knows what is being said but is unable to retrieve that memory and make sense of the words?
Does she see the faces of her loved ones, and know that she knows them, yet she can't quite place them or figure it out?
Do the words come to her, at the tip of her tongue, but she just can't spit it out?
What a frustrating feeling it is, to feel the sense that there is something you should know, but unable to pinpoint it.
I imagine this is mom's whole world now.
Each day, more and more of the things she once knew are pushed to a place where she can longer retrieve the memory of it. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 27, 2015>
Music is an entryway to the soul.
Several people have sent me links about the effects of music with dementia patients.
Music has been used as a form of therapy for Alzheimer's and dementia patients.
I even read a story about one man, who had Alzheimer's and had not spoken in four years, who attempted to speak again after a month of music therapy.
While much of how the brain and body processes music remains a mystery, this much we know: there is a strong connection between the brain's auditory cortex and it's limbic system, which is where all emotions are processed.
Music has been known to relieve agitation, reduce stress, decrease problem behaviors and so on.
Mom used to love listening to her music; even in her stages of dementia.
I've noticed that lately, however, mom's radio has been very quiet.
While I was over at mom's a few weeks ago, I decided to see if I could rekindle mom's love for music.
As she sat on her bed, waiting for the clock to change to 12:00, I dusted off the CD player by her bedside and put in her favorite CD- a Mormon Tabernacle Greatest Hits CD.
"Mom, do you remember this music?"
I asked.
Mom gaze did not break from the clock.
"Born Free!"
I sang in my operatic voice, trying to spark some memory with mom.
She shifted slightly on the edge of her bed but continued to stare at her clock, ignoring my serenade.
I changed the song to another familiar song.
"Oh what a beautiful morning!
Oh what a beautiful day..." I sang, again in my exaggerated opera voice.
Mom used to wake me up with her own operatic version of this song long ago, when I was a child.
Oh how it annoyed me then, in those early hours of the morning!
And oh, how I'd do anything to hear her sing it just once more!
I put my arms around mom and sang very theatrically, trying desperately for a response.
Mom finally looked at me from the corner of her eye.
"It's 11:55 too, just a few more minutes and it's lunch time," she said, in her slurred speech.
"Mom, do you remember this song?"
I said, redirecting the conversation.
After asking for a few more times, mom finally looked at her CD player suspiciously and said, "I used to use that too and put on my good music too from that place far far away."
"Yes mom, you mean the Mormon Tabernacle Choir.
This is them.
This is your favorite CD.
You used to listen to it all the time," I answered.
After a couple more times of repeating that explanation, mom finally responded, "No this isn't right, I don't know this."
To be honest I wasn't really expecting that she would remember.
But coming face to face with reality is always a little tough.
After my silly serenades failed to spark any memory with mom, I just sat beside her and put my around her, choking back the tears.
I told her that I loved her and that I missed her.
Mom continued to stare at the clock and 11:58 she broke free from my embrace and stood in front of the clock.
She waved her hand, mumbling, "11:58, good, almost time to eat lunch when it changes to 11:59."
No sooner than the digital clock read 11:59, mom sprinted out of her bedroom and down the hallway, towards the kitchen to make her sandwich.
Dementia is such a confusing disease.
Sometimes I feel as if we are stuck in limbo.
Mom is still living, yet she's not really living.
Each time I try to spark her memory or make a connection with her, I know my efforts are in vain, yet I can't help trying. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 19, 2015>
A few months ago, I saw some posts floating around on a few Facebook Dementia/Alzheimer's pages about a new movie coming out, called "Still Alice".
The movie stars Julianne Moore, who plays a 50 year old woman diagnosed with Early Onset Alzheimer's Disease.
People in the dementia community are encouraging others to support this movie and raise awareness about early onset dementia.
It sounded like a movie I'd be interested in seeing and I learned that it was set to release on January 16th.
I anticipated the release of "Still Alice" and had plans to see it over this past weekend.
When I scrolled through my phone to view the movie listings, however, "Still Alice" was nowhere to be found!
Turns out, the movie is an independent film and is showing only in a select few theatres.
I was pretty disappointed.
I'd been hearing great reviews of the movie and Julianne Moore even won a Golden Globe for her performance (and she's up for an Academy Award!
); I was looking forward to seeing it.
Instead of sitting in a movie theatre Saturday night like I had planned, I ended up in Target with my hubby and kids.
I had only recently learned that this movie was based on a book so while shopping, I made a detour through the book section, and look what I found!
Even though I was in the middle of reading another book, I began reading this book Saturday night.
And I couldn't put it down.
I just finished all 292 pages this morning, less than 48 hours after buying the book.
Even though I may have more of a vested interest in a book about dementia, this book isn't written exclusively for people who are dealing with the illness.
It was very well written and a great read for anybody.
It does give a lot of insight about the illness and the hardships that come with it, but the author delivers it in a way that is compelling; you don't feel like you are being "taught" about dementia as you read.
You feel as though you are given insight into Alice's life, from her perspective, as it is turned upside down with her diagnosis.
The book was powerful with raw emotion.
If you are a big reader, you will like this book.
Some of you may wonder how I can read the content of this book, given my situation with my mom.
It's easy: I sat with a box of tissues next to me!
In all seriousness, this book gave me insight into my mom's perception of the state she's in.
There were so many similarities between and Alice and my mom, but one major difference is that Alice knew she had the disease; by the time my mom received her diagnosis, she didn't know what Dementia or Alzheimer's was.
I often wonder what thoughts were going through my mom's mind (and still are going through her mind!)
as she began noticing her memory problems.
As I read about Alice, I felt so much compassion and empathy towards to my own mom.
It was also somewhat reassuring to know that, even though she may not remember a lot of things or communicate what she is thinking, there's a part of her still there that appreciates all the kindness and love we have to offer.
She is still a person, maybe not the same as we knew her.
But it reminded me to never throw in the towel and assume that she's too far gone to know what she wants or how she feels.
When I finished reading the book, I went back to my mom's room and beside her on the bed.
A few tears rolled down my cheek as I put my arms around my mom and I told her I loved her.
I received no response in return, but I have to believe that even though she can't communicate a response, something is stirred inside of her.
I highly recommend this book for anyone to read.
It is engaging, intriguing, heartwarming, sad of course; but it also bring awareness to the disease and teaches (in a non-teachy way) how to recognize the signs of early onset dementia.
It is far more common that people realize!
Catching it early on can help a lot in the management and slowing-down of the disease process for many dementias, including Alzheimer's.
If you are looking for something to pick up and read, pick it up or order it on Amazon!
Keep your eye open for the movie.
I believe it will be released Nationwide as the Oscars draw closer.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 12, 2015>
It's been a while since I've do a full update on mom.
I used to post an update every 6 months, following her check-up with UCLA.
Since we've discontinued our visits to UCLA, I haven't been regular about posting updates.
So here it is; a full evaluation of where mom is as of the New Year, 2015.
LANGUAGE Although mom's language showed some slight improvements a few months ago, it quickly slipped away.
If you don't talk to mom on a regular basis, it is likely that you won't understand much of what she says.
I'm usually able to make sense of what she is trying to say (mostly because she is very repetitive in every conversation...one clear word will tell me what topic we are discussing), however, there have been a few times where I have no idea what she is trying to say.
She speaks rather quickly, but most of her speech is slurred and mumbled.
CONVERSATION This is different from language.
Mom used to talk about her childhood A LOT; memories, events from the past.
She loved to talk about religion and her pioneer ancestors.
As of now, there are only a few things she will talk about: how weird she looks, how nobody supports her to drive her places, how those stupid doctors shouldn't have cancelled her as a driver, how she needs more make-up, how she needs her medicine....that's about it.
I never hear her talk of the past anymore.
She really doesn't comprehend much of anything we say.
IF she does, it is only after repeating ourselves several times and then she might pick up on one word that makes a connection.
She talks but she doesn't listen.
It's near impossible now to have any kind of conversation with her.
HYGEINE Unfortunately, this skill is rapidly declining.
Mom will go several days without a shower and oftentimes my dad has to corner her while she is changing (either in the morning or the evening) and force her into the shower.
Once she is in the shower, she is able to wash her hair and body with prompts from dad.
Most days mom will hang her head in the sink in the morning to wash her hair and sometimes she will step in the shower to sponge bathe particular areas.
But it has become a real struggle to keep mom fresh and clean.
She still brushes her teeth after every meal and washes her hands after she uses the bathroom.
GROOMING Mom does still dress herself.
However, most days she wears her shirts backwards and sometimes her clothes are inside out.
She doesn't notice it at all.
She still attempts to do her hair and make-up.
Lately, her eyebrows have been blue but she doesn't seem to notice it.
She puts on LOTS of body splash.
She used to have 2 favorite scents from Bath & Body Works (Vanilla and Moonlight Path) but now she is down to only one scent: Moonlight Path.
DAILY ACTIVITIES She hasn't done much for a while now, but her days are more and more dictated by routine and familiarity.
She rarely leaves the house; we can't get her to come over for family dinners or gatherings anymore.
Her days consist of sitting on her bed while she waits for medicine time (she sits and waits for at least an hour before each time), playing computer games and waiting at the window for my dad to come home so she can pester him to let her drive places.
Once in a while she will walk to her sister's house or attempt to walk up to the Avon Lady's house.
Other than that, she is a hermit.
EATING If we thought her menu was limited before, it's nothing compared to now.
She has her "Slim Fast" for breakfast every morning and two Ensures a day: a vanilla Ensure with her daytime medicine and a chocolate Ensure with her night time medicine.
She eats peanut butter and jelly sandwiches everyday for lunch and alternates between sandwiches and "Slim Fast" for dinner.
If we're lucky, dad might be able to convince her to eat a turkey, cheese and tomato sandwich for dinner.
She no longer eats salads, tortellini, or even fruit.
I don't know what will happen when she forgets what a sandwich is; it's the only solid food she eats!
She is very messy when she eats.
She always ends up with jelly on her face and most times it is all over the table; sometimes the chair and floor.
Again, she is unaware of the mess she makes and doesn't clean up after herself.
SLEEP She seems to be sleeping through the night...although I'm not positive about that.
My dad would have to speak on that one.
At this point, she stays in her bed through the night and knows when it is time to sleep.
She continues to nap daily, but her timing has changed slightly (she goes down much earlier now).
CONCEPTS Mom seems to have lost the concept of time.
She can still tell you the names of the months, but she doesn't seem to know what month we are in or what day of the week it is.
In fact, my dad told me that on Saturday she thought it was Friday.
I have tried to point out days of the week on the calendar for her and she doesn't seem to connect the dots.
She still knows what time to take her medicines, but I'm not so sure she understands the meaning of a minute or hour which would explain why she sits on her bed for hours at a time staring at the clock; she is waiting for it to read a specific time as her cue of what to do but doesn't really understand how long it will take until the clock changes to that time.
That's my theory anyway... She has no concept of money.
She knows she needs it, but doesn't really understand the significance or the value of costs.
So, there you have it-in a nutshell.
I'm not sure if I missed anything, but you get the idea.
It's a little frightening to see what is in store in the next 6 months, and the next year.
Sometimes I don't realize just how bad it's gotten until I see it spelled out.
It's so heartbreaking to see mom's quality of life gone.
I really don't know what keeps her going, she lives for her medicine and computer games.
It's a very depressing life, devoid of any pleasure.
:(
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 5, 2015>
This Christmas went about as well as expected.
Mom had no idea what Christmas was; it is the first year that she has completely forgotten the holidays.
That was a little tough...we kept trying to spark her memory with different Christmas decorations, traditions, etc.
But it was to no avail.
Mom lives in a small little world that revolves around medicine, eating and sleeping.
She knows about little else.
My Aunt Claudia (mom's sister) planned a Christmas Eve party at her house.
This used to be our family tradition-up until my grandparents died a few years back.
Christmas Eve was always a lovely affair.
Grandma spent days beforehand baking an array of Christmas goodies and prepared tins of treats for everyone.
Dozens of presents were lined under the tree for all of the kids, grandkids and my grandparents.
Nobody was forgotten.
Aunt Claudia really wanted to recreate Christmas Eve and really wanted my mom to be there.
We knew that mom wasn't going to understand the significance or meaning to our traditional gathering, but we really wanted to try to get her there anyway.
It was nothing short of a Christmas miracle that dad was able to get mom into the car that Christmas Eve afternoon and across town to her sister's house.
When mom arrived at her sister's house, she walked through the house, searching for people and trying to make sense of who everyone was.
Unfortunately, she never connected who her nieces and nephews were and it even took her awhile to figure out who my brother and his wife were (they had arrived at my Aunt's directly from Arizona).
She paced the house for a good amount of time; it was hard to get her to settle down.
She walked around, repeating, "I miss my brother Jeff, I wish he was here I miss him."
We laughed a couple times when she wandered around searching for the grandkids - my sister's daughter, Raelynn, in particular.
At one point, mom stuck her head outside the back door in an effort to locate Raelynn and as Raelynn responded to grandma's calls, my mom took Raelynn by the hand and brought her over to my sister, stating, "Here you need to be with your mom, you should stay with your mom."
We were able to finally get her to settle down and sit with us; for a little while, anyway.
When she was ready to go, she was ready to go!
She charged out the door and plopped herself down inside dad's truck at one point.
She eventually had to go potty and reluctantly came back inside the house.
Before she could head back to the truck, we pulled her into a family picture and dad was able to settle her down once again (I think he bribed her by showing her her nightly medicines).
She didn't understand one bit of Christmas Eve, but we were able to get her there and spend some time together as a family.
My Aunt did a beautiful job of recreating our Christmases of the past.
I know that we will look back on this memory with fondness and I'm glad mom was able to be there in some small way.
Christmas Day didn't go as well as Christmas Eve.
Of course mom is set in her own routine so it meant nothing to her when we all showed up Christmas morning for our traditional Christmas breakfast and gift exchange.
We tried to get her to sit with us to open up some presents, but it was her time to sit on her bed and watch the clock for the next hour until it was time to potty.
My sisters and I took in some presents for her to open in her bedroom.
I was the smart one of the group (ha ha) and I put her presents in an open basket rather than in a gift bag, since I knew she wouldn't understand that concept.
It's hard to Christmas shop for someone who just sits on her bed half the day, so we all opted out of sentimental gifts and bought her practical gifts that she would enjoy instead, which includes: make up, Ensure and Bath & Body Works.
When I presented her her basket, she couldn't connect that it was a gift.
She must have thought that I was showing her something that she already had.
It wasn't until my sis-n-law stepped in and starting taking body lotions out of her gift bag that the light bulb suddenly went on.
"Oh, this is for me?
You bought this for me too?
Oh yeah, that's so good."
And with that, mom took her gifts and put them in her home.
Mom lost interest in viewing her other gifts after she put her lotions away, so when she came out of her room to take her empty "Slim Fast" cup to the kitchen sink, we redirected her to the couch in an effort to get her to open up the rest of her gifts.
She didn't understand what we wanted her to do and she kept trying to get up to leave.
My brother and I held her on the couch for a few minutes, with me draping my legs over her in an effort to get her to stay, he he.
As we tried to explain to her that she had more gifts, mom complained about how she needed to go up to the store to get more make-up.
My dad brought over his gift bag to her which contained more make-up than any one person needed.
When mom inspected eyeliners (tearing it out of it's packages to make sure it was the right one) she wiggled her way out of our grasp and made a mad dash to her bathroom, where she put her gifts in their home.
All in all, I enjoyed the holiday season.
I wasn't expecting much with mom so I wasn't let down as hard, if that makes sense.
I still miss her all the time and it's so disheartening to watch her slip away and disengage with the family.
I just can't imagine what next year will bring, although traveling anywhere (even across town) will be out of the question I'm sure.
You might also notice some other changes in mom.
She has started using her blue eyeliner/eyeshadow for her eyebrows.
The first time this happened (a few weeks ago) I thought it was a simple mistake.
But she's been doing her make-up like this ever since.
She also wears her shirts backwards most days.
:(
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 10, 2014>
Every time my mom sees my dad, she complains about him not being "supportive" of her.
He won't give her credit cards or money, he won't give her the keys to the car, he takes away her blow dryer, he threw out her holey clothes...she's fixated on the things he won't let her do-the ways he won't "support" her and pouts endlessly about it.
I feel for my dad; obviously he is doing what is best (and safest) for my mom, but it must still be hard to have to take that independence away from your spouse and be harassed about it day and day out.
In fact, some things have taken a little too long for him to "take away" from her in my opinion, and no doubt it is because he is trying to let her hold on to whatever she can for as long as she can.
It's a hard position to be in.
One of the few things that mom does everyday is her hair and make-up, as you all know from my other posts!
She religiously dyes her hair every 8 weeks and marks the calendar for every 8th Friday as "dye hair" day.
Mom is losing her concept of days (I'll touch on that in another post) so on Monday she had it in her head that it was hair dyeing day-which means that I was the lucky one on duty to supervise mom in her hair dyeing adventure.
When I first arrived, I had no idea that mom was dyeing her hair.
When I heard both the sink running and the blow dryer going, I knew it was time to peek in on her.
I found the blow dryer on the floor beside her, blowing on the rug, and mom bending over the sink in my dad's Rolling Stones t-shirt.
She wore a plastic glove on her right hand, which clued me in on what she was doing.
As I approached mom at the sink, I saw reddish-brown water dripping all over the counter and into the sink.
What was most alarming, however, was the stream of dyed-water tricking into her eyes.
"Ouch, this is so weird ouch, I don't know why it's hurting here ouch," mom mumbled, rubbing her plastic, dye-covered gloves over her eye.
"Mom, no...you shouldn't touch your eyes.
Don't touch your eyes."
I tried to make her understand that it was the hair dye dripping into her eyes that was causing her discomfort.
I tried to convince her to hop into the shower.
Of course she didn't understand any of my direction.
Instead, she nudged me away and continued to fill her Princess House Crystal glass with water and dump it over her head.
I admit I really didn't know what to do and so I let her continue to rinse.
I suppose I probably should have stripped her down and thrown her in the shower.
But I felt as though that might be a violation of her and I was unsure if that was the right answer (aside from the fact that mom is bigger than me...I'm not sure if I could handle her alone).
When mom felt as though she had rinsed enough (all of the dye was NOT out of her hair), she spun her head around and, without wringing out any water from her hair, made her way to a towel she had hung over the shower stall.
Water and dye left a pathway to her shower stall and stained the clothes she had thrown on the floor.
Needless to say, there was a huge mess to clean up after this ordeal; obviously the biggest concern is not the mess, but rather the hair dye harming mom's eyes.
I regretted having to relate the details to my dad.
This is going to be another big obstacle for him and I feel for him.
Yet again, he will be the "unsupportive" husband and will have a huge battle on his hands when he refuses to give her her hair dye.
We could try to dye her hair for her, but I don't know if she will understand what we are trying to do or even allow us to do it-she is very set in her routine and her way of doing things.
Maybe we can convince her to let her hair stylist do it for her; again, it's not part of her routine.
Time will tell. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 2, 2014>
Last summer, we traveled to Arizona to move my brother (and his family) out of his apartment and into a house.
My dad came up with a seemingly great idea: let Joe and Natalie host Thanksgiving this year in their new place.
Although I loved the idea of getting away and going to Joe's, I was very wary about how mom would handle the trip.
How would she do on the drive?
Would she understand where/why she was going?
Would she engage at all or be miserable out of her comfort zone?
How would we be able to go out anywhere all together?
Not to worry, says my dad, the optimist.
He planned to bring his fifth wheel trailer; after all, there is a trailer camp a mile down the road from Joe's house.
Mom would have her own space to sleep and get ready.
But what about throughout the day?
we all wondered.
Dad figured that if Joe set up mom's favorite computer games on his computer, mom would be content to stay at Joe's house throughout the day to play games and maybe, just maybe, engage with family.
Well...day one seemed to be off to a good start.
Wednesday morning, dad dragged mom out of bed, showered her and had her in the truck, ready to go, by 8:00.
That is a huge accomplishment for mom.
Even though she couldn't understand where exactly they were going (she had it in her head that they were going to the mall and was annoyed with dad many times for going the wrong way), by the time they had arrived to Arizona and we answered the front door, mom came plowing through declaring, "Joe?
Joe?
Is this Joe's house too?"
She came in and we all said hi and greeted mom, telling her how happy we were that she was there.
Just why she was there, she had no idea.
I suppose she thought they drove five hours to simply say hello.
At any rate, we brought Joe and Natalie's 9 month old baby, Zach, over to mom and sat him in her lap in an effort to engage her.
Most times, she will not look much at Zach and seems oblivious to his presence.
But this time, she actually smiled at him and for a brief moment even held him (with Natalie's help, of course).
It was such a touching moment to witness mom finally engaging (even if only very briefly) with her youngest grandbaby.
It was a moment that I am sure we will all remember.
[And we'll all remember (with giggles) the moment afterwards when she pushed Zach back towards Natalie and said, "She's your mom she's your mom, go to your mom."]
But alas, all good things must come to an end.
Within a couple of hours, mom was ready to go.
Dinner and medicine time were coming up and mom wanted to be in her space.
Dad took her back to her trailer and we thought (or had hoped) that she would be content in her home-away-from-home.
Unfortunately, mom was ready to go home.
Nevertheless, she settled down and the next morning (Thanksgiving) dad was able to get her back over to Joe's....for a little while.
She was restless again by noon time and insisted that dad take her home.
Dad eventually gave in and took her back to the trailer for a nap.
I suspect the only way he got her back over to Joe's later that afternoon was that she was hopeful he was obliging her requests to go home.
Needless to say, she was not happy to be at my brother's house.
For the next two hours, she paced, she complained, she tried to find ways out of the house (the closet, the garage, the front door).
There were a couple of times we had to guard the door and a couple other times we had to bring her back inside after her attempt to escape to the truck.
We tried to get her engaged in computer games, but that master plan failed.
She wasn't familiar with Joe's computer, especially because it was a laptop rather than a desktop.
She insisted that it wasn't right and would not even give it a second glance.
And my dad...his despair was plain to see.
Thanksgiving is his favorite holiday.
I know he was really looking forward to all of us being together and spending time together as a family.
He hardly spoke and I could see the sadness in his eyes.
He didn't even eat his pie-we made both of his favorites: pumpkin and coconut.
I hope I'm not crossing the line by writing about this, but how can you not feel depressed under these circumstances?
As hard as it is for me and much as I miss my mom, she is my dad's wife, his life partner, the love of his life.
We tried to get him to laugh during dinner and lighten the mood, but when he finally spoke, reality hit me hard when he said, "This is the last holiday".
We all know this, of course.
Mom barely engaged in the holidays last year.
This year it is completely gone.
And so it's hard for my dad to carry on and celebrate the holidays without my mom.
"The magic is gone," he says.
We tried to convince my dad to move the trailer in front of Joe's house that night; he was in no mood to deal with it.
After mom swung her bag and hit dad in the back of his head (in an effort to get his attention to take her home), dad got up from the table and took mom back to the trailer for the night.
Dad was ready to take mom back home, but we still wanted him to stay and visit with us and we really wanted to boost his spirit.
The next morning, my brother, nephew and I went to dad's trailer and told him we were there to help him move the trailer to Joe's house.
Surprisingly, he gave in.
We packed him up and set him up at Joe's house.
At least there, he could come inside to visit while mom remained where she was a little more comfortable.
For the next couple of days, dad was able to come inside and visit with us while still keeping an eye on mom.
We watched movies, he rode his scooter with the kids, we celebrated my brother-in-law's birthday.
We spent some time shopping and taking the kids to the park and whatnot, but my dad stayed behind.
He didn't want to even deal with mom out in public; he already felt so defeated.
It was disappointing that we couldn't all go out together.
My brother stayed behind and hung out in the trailer with my parents while we took the kids out on Saturday.
Mom continued to nag dad to take her home, but he seemed to be in better spirits about it than on Thanksgiving Day.
Originally, dad had planned to stay until Monday to beat traffic.
But he was tired and felt like he was keeping mom prisoner, so he left with us on Sunday.
Mom was restless most of the way home and was upset that dad was "going the wrong way".
"That's not the way you go, you shouldn't go that way, you're so stupid," she'd say.
When we stopped for lunch, we had to practically drag her inside the restaurant and dad had to trap her in a booth while we ordered his lunch.
She kept trying to pinch him to get free and asked if we were at the "food place up the street."
"Is that store Stater Brothers over there too?
Can I walk home now?"
(We were barely at state line).
We made it through lunch without her escaping and continued our journey home.
Because of the holiday traffic, our 5 hour drive turned into 8.
Thankfully my dad had my nephew in the truck with him to help keep him sane, but it was a difficult drive, no doubt.
So there you have it.
I wish I could say it was a wonderful trip with lots of grand memories made.
Don't get me wrong, we had some fun and laughs and did make some memories, but I know it was a big let down for my dad.
Needless to say, this was not only the last holiday, but it was also mom's last trip.
I know we've said that the past couple of trips, but this trip surely sealed the deal.
And now...on to Christmas.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 1, 2014>
IT'S THAT TIME OF YEAR AGAIN!!!
Mom's English Toffee was such a success last year that we are doing it again!
From now until Dec. 21st, you can order my mom's famous English Toffee.
Please note that I make up the orders when I have the right amount to complete a whole batch.
If there is a specific date that you want/need the toffee, please specify that for me.
Otherwise I will start making batches the week of December 8th and filling them in complete batches so none goes to waste.
It ships well so if you are in another state, you can still partake in this deliciousness!!
I send my toffee out priority mail to ensure that you get it quickly.
Please carefully select from the options below, as there are a few options (two for shipping and one for local pick up).
If you prefer to pay with cash or check, just let me know!
TOFFEE PRICES FOR SHIPPING *The shipping reflects in the check out section.
There are two shipping options due to do higher costs for higher amounts of toffee ordered.
Shipping for 1/2-1 pound of toffee is $5.20 and anything more than 1 pound is $10.95; that is priority shipping.
English Toffee-WITH SHIPPING 1/2 pound $8.50 USD 1 pound $17.00 USD   English Toffee-WITH SHIPPING 1 1/2 pounds $25.50 USD 2 pounds $34.00 USD 3 pounds $51.00 USD   PRICES FOR LOCAL PICK UP (WITHOUT SHIPPING CHARGES) English Toffee-LOCAL DELIVERY 1/2 pound $8.50 USD 1 pound $17.00 USD 1 1/2 pounds $25.50 USD 2 pounds $34.00 USD 3 pounds $51.00 USD   **To view other fundraisers we have going on or to make a donation to my mom's caregiving expenses, please visit my fundraising page.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 18, 2014>
A couple of months ago, I posted big news here on my blog.
We have had a few really great board meetings now and are well on our way to getting this foundation established!
I want to give you all a quick update on the progress we've made!
One of our first items of business was to name our Foundation.
We wanted to choose a name that represented our mission while also paying tribute to the person who has inspired this foundation: my mom.
We tossed around several ideas and the name we have elected is The D.E.A.N.A Foundation [The Dementia Expense And Nursing Assistance Foundation].
The purpose of this foundation is as described in our mission statement: "Our mission at the Deana Foundation is to provide financial relief to middle class families affected by dementia.
We understand the emotional and financial burden this disease places on families caring for their loved one.
We strive to ease these burdens by providing emotional support, resources, and caregiving grants."
Establishing a foundation is not a small undertaking.
This isn't an amateur idea that came to me in passing.
I've spent many hours pondering and researching how to make this vision happen (as have the other board members).
This is going to be a legit foundation and I hope to reach thousands, even millions, of people down the road.
There are a lot of formalities in establishing a foundation (I won't bore you with all the details); I'm excited to say that we have completed the first big chunk, which is to write the foundation's Articles of Incorporation and by laws.
I am forever grateful to our board member, Melissa, who has spent a lot of time figuring this part out.
Because of her hard work, we were able to sign and mail in our Articles of Incorporation to the Secretary of State last week!
This step approves our foundation name and establishes us as a non-profit charity.
As soon as we hear back, we will be ready to file our tax exempt paperwork, get our taxpayer ID number and be ready to get this party started!!
Some other things we are working on include: a foundation logo, vision boards for our website, marketing and brainstorming ideas for our grand opening event.
We still have a few seats open on the board, if anyone would like to serve with us!
Living closeby is great but not necessary; in the future I would love to see this foundation reach across the country!
That's my update for now.
I just want you all to know that things are moving along...it wasn't just an idea that has passed!
It is very much happening.
It's just a long process to get going.
Please continue to share my blog on your social media sites and with those around you and help to get the word out!
I am very hopeful that we will be able to make a difference in many lives through The D.E.A.N.A Foundation!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 12, 2014>
For the past couple of months, mom has been trying to escape the house.
She's pretty sneaky too.
Some days she waits in the back of the house, sweater on and purse in hand, and then pops around the corner and makes a mad dash for the door before anyone can stop her.
Some days she sneaks through the garage door and opens it up and runs out.
She has even tried going through the backyard; she can't figure out the lock on the gate but she has actually gone so far as to try and hop the brick wall!!
We've always got to be two steps ahead of mom.
After my dad leaves in the morning, he unplugs the garage door opener.
The gates are locked; mom's only escape route now is the front door.
What we've been doing is guarding the door; as soon as we see mom come down the hall, we park ourselves in front of the door and do not let her through.
You can imagine how tedious that task can be...sitting in a chair in front of the door for sometimes hours on end!
One day, she was giving my Tia an especially hard time about getting out and my poor Tia was very stressed out.
My brother-in-law went over to help her and my mom body slammed him against the wall in an attempt to break free!
Guarding the door was obviously a temporary solution as we brainstormed other options.
We thought about putting a lock on the top of the door on the inside.
The problem with that would be if mom somehow figured it out; no doubt she'd lock out her caregivers.
We attempted a childproof lock-the plastic circle kind that goes over the doorknob.
My sister-in-law brought one over on her first day watching my mom.
Mom hit that plastic child lock until it finally snapped off the doorknob!
My dad is a pretty smart guy.
He came up with a good solution.
Duh, why didn't I think of that?
(Nevermind the rust on the screen door ;) ) Now, when a caregiver arrives, they have a key to lock themselves inside.
Mom doesn't understand the concept of unlocking from the inside, so for now we can rest easy knowing that she can't escape outside without us.
Let's hope she doesn't get too creative in finding another way out!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 6, 2014>
I absolutely love the holiday season.
The changing seasons, the chill in the air, the scents of pumpkin and holiday spices, the feeling of gratitude and helping others in need...I love everything about this season-from October until January.
Now that Halloween and October birthdays are over, I decided to get focused on Christmas!
I know...can't the turkey have his holiday?
;) I really want to get my Christmas shopping done before Thanksgiving so that I can sit back and truly enjoy all the holiday traditions and festivities that the season brings.
I don't want to have to think about shopping after November!
Yesterday, while my kids were at school and my youngest was at his preschool group, I decided to tackle some Christmas shopping.
I love Christmas presents, and not for materialistic reasons.
I really enjoy finding that "perfect" gift for the people I love.
I love seeing their faces when they open up their gifts that I've carefully selected that I know they'll love.
I love gifts because I love giving.
While driving to my shopping destinations yesterday, I was alone in my thoughts.
It's a rare occasion that I drive anywhere alone; those quiet moments always cause me to pause and reflect.
My thoughts quickly turned to my mom.
Last year, we had a pretty good feeling that it was our last Christmas with mom knowing what the holiday was.
Given that she hasn't been remembering any of our birthdays over the past few months, I am doubtful that she will have any clue about what the upcoming holidays represent.
I was remembering the beautiful quilt I made her last year and how excited I was to give it to her.
I was very proud of that perfect gift I had created for her.
And then my thoughts turned to a day, not too long ago, when I was at mom's house.
She was sitting on her bed in her usual silence, arms folded across her stomach.
I tried to strike up a conversation with her and reached for the blanket that was folded up on dad's side of the bed.
I spread the quilt across the two of us and pointed to some pictures of her grandkids.
"Remember this blanket I made for you last Christmas?
Who are these people on here, mom.
Do you remember?"
I asked, pointing at the square with my son's face printed on.
Mom wouldn't meet my eyes nor would she look at the blanket.
She seemed agitated that I was bothering her with incessant chatter.
"No, that goes there," she finally responded, grabbing the quilt from me and tossing it back to my dad's side of the bed.
As I reflected on this, driving in my car on my way to pick out those perfect gifts, I thought about all of the perfect gifts I have selected for my mom over the years.
Though they were meaningful in the moment, they mean nothing to her now.
They hold no value or significance to mom any longer.
All of the material things that she owns in life- every gift she's received and everything she has worked so hard to buy for herself- no longer holds meaning for her (save it be her blow dryer, make up, and a few other daily objects that she uses).
What makes it even harder is that not only do the "things" we've gotten her no longer matter, but even the memories of them are fading; the memory of why each of her belongings are significant.
As this realization hit me, my perspective changed just a little.
I spend so much time thinking about getting the perfect gift and giving people "things" that will make them happy.
At the end of the day, is that what really matters?
I'm not saying that it's not important to me; I still love giving personal gifts to my loved ones and seeing that look of happiness when they open their gift.
But thinking about my mom was a reminder to me to focus on what matters most: spending time and making memories with the people I love.
I am excited to get those special gifts and by Thanksgiving, I'd like to have them all wrapped and ready to place under the Christmas tree so that I can devote the rest of my energy on making the season special for those around me.
We can't take our material things with us when we die.
My mom has already reached the point where those material things don't matter.
Unfortunately even her memories are leaving her.
But I believe that one day, all of those memories will be restored.
Traditions, time spent with loved one, lifting those up around us, making memories...that is what matters the most!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 29, 2014>
Right around the time my baby turned 3, pajama time became a nightmare.
He became very obstinate about changing from his clothes into his pj's.
There were some nights where I had to hold him down, straddling my legs around his while sitting him down on my lap, as I attempted to undress and redress with pajamas.
By the time we had made the switch I was breathless and my heart was racing from the intense work out.
You get the picture.
Now, picture this scenario with a grown adult.
One of the struggles we have with my mom is that she doesn't change her clothes very often.
Everyday, she puts on the same clothes as the day before.
On occasion (maybe once a week),she will trade one outfit for another and throw her worn clothes into the laundry pile.
You will notice in the pictures I post that most outfits look the same.
A few weeks ago, while I was over at mom's, she smelled very...fragrant.
Foundation stained the neck of her blouse and when I leaned in closer to mom, I could smell that her clothes desperately needed to be wash.
The tricky part was getting her to change.
She doesn't comprehend anything I try to say to her, so I knew explaining that wasn't worth the effort.
And there was no way I could change her by myself.
Besides that, it feels like a violation to have to undress my grown up mom against her will.
Still, something needed to be done.
Lucky for me, dad ended up coming home late that morning.
We discussed the showering/clothes changing situation and I noted that mom's clothes really stunk.
I'm sure it's not easy for my dad to have to take charge of mom, but he does really well at it.
While I'm still nervous sometimes to go in and do things against her will, he just goes in and does it whether she likes it or not.
I think she kind of looks at him like her father figure in some ways; she listens to him a little better.
However...she was not understanding the concept of changing her clothes.
"Deana, we need to wash your clothes, they stink," dad said, a countless number of times.
When mom was unresponsive to dad's prodding, dad sat beside her and started to take her shirt off.
"No, stop it, don't do that," mom said with a little smirk on her face.
She glanced at me from the corner of her eyes with a mischevious look...like maybe she thought dad was trying to get frisky with her.
Ha ha.
"No no, you can't do that, she can't see me," she remarked.
Despite mom's protests, dad successfully got mom's shirt off and then started to work on her jeans.
Mom became even more stubborn.
"No, no!"
she said, struggling but also still smirking.
"Deana, stand up," dad said, trying to get mom to stand to make it easier to slip off her pants.
Of course, mom wouldn't budge.
I figured I was going to have to step in and help dad.
"Here mom, stand up," I said.
Together we pulled her off of the bed and held her in a standing position.
"No no, you shouldn't be doing that, no," mom continued.
"We need to change your clothes, mom," I said.
I held her up while dad scooted her jeans down past her hips.
Mom quickly dropped herself down on the bed and I began to take off her shoes.
"No no, why are you doing that, stop it.
Stop it!"
Mom said, breaking out into a giggle while she swat at my hand.
She laid down on the bed, eyeing us both suspiciously and giggling with protest.
My dad and I started chuckling; as adamant as mom was that we leave her alone, her giggling and smirking made our chore a little more bearable.
We were able to successfully pull off mom's clothing and dad immediately took a load of her laundry into the washer, handing her a clean pair of clothes to put on.
Needless to say, it is much easier to catch those dirty clothes at night when she takes them off then it is to struggle with her to change once she's already dressed!
She still isn't happy when her clothes disappear into the washer (she lays them out right next to her bed so she can see them in the morning), but we do what we gotta do!
My son is 3 1/2 now and lucky for me, his phase didn't last too long.
I'm happy to report that he's pretty easygoing these days about changing into his jammies.
Unfortunately for my mom, the struggle has just begun.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 22, 2014>
Here I am, your crazy health lady, here to share another important message with you!!
A friend sent this link to me this morning and I have to admit, it made my morning.
Partly because of this big "breakthrough" for treating/preventing Alzheimer's and related dementias, and partly because it proves I'm not crazy afterall...not totally, anyway ;)  Apparently, UCLA has been doing some studies and found that you can actually reverse memory issues (including Alzheimer's and related dementias) through-get this-diet and lifestyle!!
There is still a lot of research and trials to be done, but they have documented success through studies with real people.
This doesn't come as a huge surprise to me because I've read several other accounts of this.
But I think for some people it helps to read it from an accredited university or medical research program rather than "some" doctor who had success and wrote a book.
I can't, in good conscience, NOT share this information with my readers.
Make of it what you want.
Personally, if I were experiencing memory loss or brain fog (which I have been through!!)
or know someone who is dealing with this, I would definitely take it seriously and pass it on.
You never know unless you try!
READ THE ARTICLE OR WATCH THE NEWSCLIP HERE.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 17, 2014>
As expected, I received a little bit of backlash from my post yesterday.
Though I expected it from this person, I feel a little disheartened by the criticism; but I have to remind myself that I began writing this blog for two reasons: 1.
To share and express the journey we're on and write down the things that I feel which are difficult to verbalize and 2.
To try to help other people on their journey as well.
Some things are harder to open up and write about than others, but I feel like I am cheating my readers if I don't share it all.
Who knows what post might affect whom.
Let me clear up some misunderstandings about my last post.
1.
I am NOT declaring that homeopaths are or will be curing my mom.
Do I think those things can help?
Yes, and that is because of my own, personal experience with it.
Do I think they are going to bring her back from dementia?
No.
2.
I am NOT declaring that it is solely the homeopaths that have improved mom's speech, or anything else for that matter.
It has certainly occurred to me that taking her off of the meds she was on has helped to improve her speech.
I simply stated the facts: we weaned her off her meds, supplemented with homeopaths, and saw very slight improvements in certain areas.
Most other areas remain the same and have shown no improvement; I was only sharing what several of us have seen and trying to have some shred of optimism in this crappy hand we've been dealt.
3.
This blog is about my mom but it is also about our journey, including mine.
I feel that everything I share on here correlates to my mom and her dementia.
There are certain events that have influenced the way I think and feel or evoked some sort of emotion that I share in a given post.
There are things that I am learning along the way and I feel like that's okay to share.
If you don't agree with my way of thinking, that's okay.
I'm not declaring that I am a doctor or that I have all the answers.
I am sharing our journey and each person can decide for themselves their takeaway from reading my blog.
4.
I've been accused of turning my blog about dementia into a blog about my crazy health theories; aren't the two (health and dementia) related?
I share my health experiences simply to send the message that lifestyle CAN play a factor in overall health, even dementia.
I made some lifestyle changes and I've seen an improvement in my health, including focus/memory issues I was having!!
I am not making any declarations of what has definitively brought about mom's changes; I'm just sharing my personal affirmation of how these things have helped me and my own personal belief of how it can help my mom, or rather, someone who is not as advanced in the disease as my mom.
I can't tell you how many studies I've read that have found connections with lifestyle and dementia.
If you don't believe it to be true, that's fine.
And if my blog is intended to help other people, then why would I not want to share some of the knowledge I've acquired and try to prevent this disease from affecting more people?
I don't claim to have the answers; I just want to share what I've learned so that maybe, just maybe, someone else can prevent it from happening.
Does anybody really have the right answer??
If they did, we'd have a cure!
I apologize if any of my readers have felt misled or interpreted my post to mean that mom is on the mend; that is not the case.
We all know what the outcome of this dreaded disease is.
With all of that to say, I hope you all will continue reading.
Unless, of course, you are losing sleep at night over the things I post.
In that case, I won't be offended to part ways ;)
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 16, 2014>
I used to think homeopathy was for a bunch of hippies.
In my mind, medicine was the answer to ailments.
If natural remedies worked, then why did our ancestors die of so many sicknesses?
(On the other hand, I don't think our ancestors had many of the chronic illnesses we now see in our society).
Since my mom's diagnosis, I've had a few friends approach me with the idea of using a naturopath doctor to help mom with some of her troubles.
While I appreciated the gesture and concern, I admit that I kind of rolled my eyes.
No way could a naturopath doctor help my mom in any way when the big wigs over at UCLA couldn't even figure it out!
I've mentioned briefly on a previous post that I was diagnosed last year with an autoimmune disease, called Hashimotos.
It wasn't until I faced my own health issues that I began to understand that there are, in fact, natural ways to help your body to heal.
This wasn't a conclusion I came upon quickly or easily; it was a long process...a process where in desperation I finally began to take my health matters into my own hands instead of fully depending on doctors to make me better.
Through a lot of hard work which has included changing my diet and other lifestyle factors, I have been feeling so much improvement in my overall well being; I feel as though I've gained my life back.
Now, I'm not knocking medicine-let me make that clear.
There is most certainly a time and place for medication.
I am on medication for my thyroid and I know that my body needs that right now, but I do believe that medication is over used in today's society and medication alone is not the answer; it is only one piece of the puzzle.
After nearly a year of no success with medication, that is when I researched and tried other methods to heal myself.
One of the action steps I took, after many frustrating and unsuccessful visits to the doctor, was that I consulted a naturopath to help me.
There's way too much information to relay on here, but the short part of the story is that the naturopath, along with lifestyle and diet changes have really improved my health.
So much that my thyroid levels have finally stabilized and my enlarged thyroid has actually shrunk in the past 6 months!!
With all of the research and things I've learned over the past 6+ months, I really feel like there is so much more to mom's dementia.
It's not just a genetic defect but I (personally) believe there are a number of factors that have contributed to it.
I'm not an expert, I'm not a doctor.
Maybe I'm way off base.
But based on everything I've learned, I do think a "perfect storm" is what brought on mom's dementia.
Certainly a genetic factor is present.
Perhaps her heart condition and surgery played a role in it as well (which I most definitely believe).
I do, however, think that certain diet and lifestyle changes could have helped her had we known more in the beginning.
They say hindsight is 20/20.
I know some people think I'm kooky for my theories; but then again, I've been doing the research.
So...how does my autoimmune issues relate to mom's dementia?
I'm getting there.
:) My dad has been wanting to get my mom off her meds for a long time.
They didn't seem to be doing her any good and if anything, they were harming her liver and causing even more side effects that have to be treated with yet another pill.
I brought the idea of a naturopath to the table and dad was on board to try anything.
I admit that deep down I was kind of hoping for some sort of magic cure, even though I knew better than to believe in that.
Still, at the very least, we both felt that doing this might be able to eliminate the hard core meds that mom was taking.
Over the past two months, dad (working with both mom's doctor as well as the naturopath) has been decreasing mom's dosages of medicine and replacing them with homeopathic remedies.
Mom is now officially off all of her pain meds, sleep meds, etc and guess what?
Mom is NOT complaining of aches and pains.
Mom has been sleeping better and has more energy (which may or may not be a good thing, ha ha).
Most notably, though, is that mom's speech has improved.
While I was with her on a Monday a few weeks ago, I was thinking that she seemed to be speaking a little more clearly.
Not sure if it was just my imagination, I didn't say anything about it.
Later that evening my sister remarked, "Is it just me, or is mom's speech improving?
It seems like I've been able to understand her a little better today."
This past weekend, my brother's family came out for a visit from Arizona.
Before they left, my sister-in-law said, "I've noticed that your mom's speech is a little better...I was able to understand a lot more of what she's saying.
And Joe actually had somewhat of a conversation with her yesterday."
With so many setbacks and defeats with this disease, I feel like we've had just a tiny victory.
It's too bad we didn't know to try some of these things before her dementia escalated to the point where it's at.
But...I think that through it all, we are all learning and paving the way for ourselves to live a healthier life.
Some things are out of our control, it's true.
We don't know what the future will bring for any of us and who knows when (or if) a cure will ever be found.
What we can do is educate ourselves now, be aware of symptoms and try to prevent from the get go with the proper lifestyle interventions.
I know this post could undergo some scrutiny, but this is our journey, and this is my take away.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 14, 2014>
This past weekend was the annual Walk To End Alzheimer's in our area.
It is our 3rd year participating as Team Dee.
I was really looking forward to this year, as it was the first year that all 3 of us kids participated together in the walk.
All the grandkids were present (except for the ones away at school) and for me, walking together in this cause helped me to feel the love and unity for my mom.
Maybe it seems silly...my brother isn't quite so sentimental.
But I feel like it was a great show of support to join in this together.
I'm so glad that everyone could make it together.
We also had one of mom's siblings there this year which was awesome.
Our group is growing each year!
This is the first year that Maurina (my oldest daughter) wasn't able to attend.
We missed her being there but I mailed her a shirt and she wore it proudly on the day of the walk!
She was with us in spirit :) My dad, Aunt and I were returning champions and we wore our medals with pride.
My friend, Mickelle, joined our team last year and returned again this year.
She graduated high school with my sister; they were freshmen when I was a senior.
All of 3 of us sang in our high school's madrigals choir.
Anyway, the 3 of us were given the opportunity to sing The National Anthem at the opening ceremonies of the walk.
It was an honor to be able to sing and fun to get up and perform again.
I can't figure out how to post it here on my blog...maybe I'll post it on my facebook page for those who really want to see it ;) Here are some pictures though.
Of course our team won the award for the Most Spirited Team at the walk.
Was there any question?
Ha ha.
And here are a few more fun pictures.
I just want to say thank you to everyone who has supported us this year.
Thank you to all of Team Dee for making it so much fun.
My Aunt Peggy, Aunt Sharon and Uncle David, who have joined me all 3 years as well as my sister-in-law Amber and her family.
This year my Aunt Claudia and her husband came as well as my mother-in-law.
And of course Mickelle and her mom, Rosemarie, and my siblings.
And thank you to everyone who donated to this cause that is so near and dear to our hearts.
What a great show of support we have each year!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 9, 2014>
This past Tuesday was my birthday.
I suspected that my mom wouldn't remember the date.
Unfortunately, my suspicions were right on.
Apparently, mom walked dad up to the Dollar Tree over the weekend to buy some birthday cards for people she thought she had missed (she stocked up on cards at the beginning of the year).
I was one of those people, although she seems to have no clue when my birthday even is!
While I was over there on Monday, she asked me to show her what day it was on the calendar.
I pointed to October 6th and said (in my preschool teacher voice), "Today is Monday, October 6th.
Tomorrow is Tuesday, October 7th.
Do you know what special day tomorrow is?"
Despite several promptings, mom couldn't tell me what was so special about the following day.
I knew better than to be hurt; I was fully expecting it.
On Tuesday, dad tried to tell her it was my and my twin's birthday with no response from mom.
The concept, like most others, is gone.
My birthday came and went and while it was a wonderful day and I was spoiled by friends, family and my wonderful hubby, my mom had forgotten about the first child she welcomed into the world.
Such is life with dementia.
Not to leave you totally depressed, here's a picture to show you that I really did have a nice day.
Of course I will always miss my mom, and it's my first birthday without her.
I'm really thankful for all the people who took the time to make it special for me.
It was a great distraction ;) I was reminisicing and trying to remember my birthday last year.
I remember suspecting it could be the last that I'd have mom aware it was my day.
I found this post about my last birthday with mom.
What a difference a year makes!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 3, 2014>
The past couple of weeks have been somewhat of a whirlwind.
Quite frankly, I'm a bit tired and ready for the weekend!!
We started out last week with mom's sudden spurt of energy, and she hasn't calmed down much since.
Because of our worries about mom getting out of the house, we've had to make sure someone is there with her all the time, which has presented some difficulty for us because up until now we felt like mom was okay by herself in the afternoons (her feet were usually only happy in the morning).
We only had caregivers lined up for the mornings and even then, my Aunt and Uncle were on vacation which left their time slot uncovered.
We decided to take the opportunity, while they were out of town, to try out a new caregiver during his time slot (more about that in a minute).
After last Monday, it became apparent that we were going to need a lot more help than we had lined up.
Fortunately, between friends from church, family, my sister and myself we've been able to keep an eye on mom the entire day.
It's been a lot of work, but we made it through and we finally have a game plan from here on out!
I told you that we tried out a new caregiver while my Uncle was out.
I had put in several calls over the past month for potential caregivers and finally found someone who was available when we needed her.
Unfortunately, that arrangement didn't work out after all.
When I initially called this caregiver, I thought she understood that I was looking for a permanent caregiver.
She agreed to come and was fine with the days/hours, but after day two it came out (in a round-about sort of way) that she really wasn't looking for anything permanent (though she is willing to come when we're in a pinch and need an extra hand).
So....after I made up an entirely new caregiving schedule, I crumpled up my sheet and went back to the drawing board.
We met with a couple of potentials, worked out all the kinks and several headaches later I FINALLY have a weekly schedule that covers mom throughout the entire day while dad is away at work.
We are still using some family and friends as volunteers (bless you all!!)
but have hired 2 caregivers to come in part time to start taking on some of the load.
It's a breath of fresh air to know that we have people lined up now for those days when family/friends might have other plans and we need a sub.
As mom's disease progresses, as our volunteers become burned out, and as budget allows, we can start to replace more of the volunteer time with the caregiver time.
It's been an adventure!
I am so thankful for all the friends and family who have helped us in all of this and who have been patient while I work out all the kinks in the schedule. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 29, 2014>
Hygeine often becomes an issue in the later stages of dementia.
Fortunately for us, mom has been rigid in her showering/hygiene routine.
She hasn't needed assistance or supervision in managing her bathing; she showers every morning-or so we thought.
A few months ago, mom started referring to certain days as "severe shower" days.
We interpreted "severe showers" to mean that those were days she washed her hair versus other days when she put on a shower cap.
Her mention of severe shower days became less frequent, but the blow dryer was still being heard in her bedroom every morning.
Why would she need to blow dry her hair if she wasn't washing it?
We figured all was well in the showering department.
Through a series of events, we came to discover exactly what "severe showers" meant.
First, a disclaimer: I don't post this to embarrass my dear mom.
By now, you should all know that the things I write about are NOT my mom, but a disease that has taken over her body and mind.
I share this only to help others to understand the complications of dementia and to prepare those who are behind us in their journey.
I just wanted to make that clear.
Back to the severe showers...after we took the blow dryer away, as my aunt checked in on my mom that week, she noticed that the shower stall was dry.
It seemed that mom didn't know what to do in her routine without her blow dryer.
For the entire week following her blow dryer confiscation, the shower stall remained dry.
After brainstorming with my dad, he decided he would disable the hot wire in the blow dryer so that mom could have her blow dryer (and routine) back without the risk of harming herself.
The morning after he did that, I went over to check in on mom.
I heard the blow dryer going; success!
Our plan had worked...or did it?
I decided to peek in on the shower stall, just to make sure it was wet, and to my surprise, it was dry apart from a small bit of water directly under the faucet.
There's no way she could have taken a severe shower with the majority of the shower stall dry!
Upon further observation, we have learned that mom is washing her face and her hair in the sink every morning (hence, why we still hear the blow dryer going everyday).
As for the rest of her body...she is sponge bathing in the shower stall but only takes severe showers once in a while.
It's not clear how long she's been doing this or how long she'd gone without a shower.
But she's been complaning of some discomfort in certain areas of her body, which is likely due to the lack of proper cleaning so my guess is that this has probably been going on for a couple of months now.
Needless to say, it is more responsiblity on my dad as he now has to ensure that she gets showered at least a few times a week.
He's been waiting for her to get undressed into her pajamas at night and takes that opportunity to push her (not harshly, of course) into the shower.
She's needed a few promptings on what to do while in the shower, but the job gets done without dad having to do more than put her in...for now. 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 25, 2014>
This week has been especially rough with mom.
She suddenly has bounds of energy and her happy feet have gotten even happier.
She used to only try to go out walking in the mornings (walking to the store, her sister's house, etc) but this week it has been an all day ordeal.
And even after she's gone out once already in the day, she is anxious to get out again in the afternoon (once a day used to be her limit).
I have my theory as to why.
I'll share that in my next post.
On Monday, I became very nervous when I arrived at mom's house and found her putting on her bra; that is the sure sign that she is ready to get out of the house.
She informed me that she was waiting until 11:00 and then she would go get her exercise.
I don't have a problem keeping up with her, but I had a busy three-year-old to drag along with me and I wasn't sure I could wrangle both of them.
I made a couple of phone calls (for back up) with no luck and then plopped down on the couch, trying to figure out my game plan.
It was my lucky day.
Just before 11, dad pulled up to the house; apparently he was done working early.
I breathed a sigh of relief and warned my dad that mom was planning her escape.
I wasn't sure where she planned on going, as she had no money that I knew of, but she had mentioned the name "Marty" in her mumblings to me earlier.
Marty is a family friend from church, who lives in the next neighborhood up.
I was pretty certain that mom wouldn't be able to remember which house was hers.
Well...to make a really long story short, mom tried leaving the house several times that day.
Dad hid her purse and coat to prevent her from leaving, and though she was pretty angry about it and frantically searching for her belongings, she ultimately decided she didn't need those things where she was going.
She stood in the living room, looking out the window, the wheels in her head obviously turning.
In a flash, mom darted out the front door and was sprinting up the street.
My dad hopped in his truck and drove alongside her as she tried to navigate her way to Marty's house.
At some point, she made some wrong turns and when dad knew that she wasn't going to give up, he steered her in the right direction.
Upon arrival at Marty's house, mom marched right in the door without even so much as a knock.
Fortunately, nobody was home (either that or they were hiding in the back room, lol) but dad was not amused that she was walking into someone's house uninvited.
Can you imagine if he hadn't been with her to show her the right house??
Once dad returned home with mom, she ate her lunch and took a nap.
When she got up from her nap, she was at it again.
She sat at her computer games for a couple of minutes here and there but was distracted with ideas of more grand adventures outside the house.
My dad blocked the front door several times, but as soon as his back was turned, she was out the door again.
This time we hopped in my van and drove together.
As I pulled over to the curbside a few feet in front of mom, dad quickly moved around the car (while I opened the back sliding door and set the child locks) and pulled her into the van.
She struggled and was half-upset, half-giggly that dad was abducting her and seat-belting her down.
She attempted to open the door but she was no match for my child locks.
It's a good thing the neighbors know us or we may have been facing kidnapping charges ;) My dad and I had an errand to run together after that last incident, and my sister came to the house to "mommysit".
In the two hours that we were gone, Christina spent most of that time guarding the front door and thwarting mom's efforts of getting away.
That was the start of the week...and just about every day since.
I'm really not too sure what transpired today, since I left out of town for a wedding.
But for the past 3 days we've been chasing down mom.
On Tuesday, we had a new caregiver at the house who didn't notice mom escape through the garage door.
I got a call from the manager at the grocery store informing me that mom was up there, alone, ripping open boxes of Sleep Aid medicine.
Apparently she found a stash of my dads change and it was just enough to buy her a bottle of pills.
Later that afternoon, I went to check on her after I picked up my kids from school (we had nobody else to cover the afternoon) and I found the front door slightly ajar and the house empty.
Thankfully, the Avon lady/mom's friend found her and brought her back home (she was trying to track her down for more eyeliner).
Yesterday she took an escape to nowhere while that same friend (Avon lady) sat at the house with her.
They ended up taking a walk around the block.
So, after an exhausting week, we have been working diligently on refiguring her caregiving situation.
It seemed to be working to only have a caregiver scheduled in the morning but she obviously needs supervision 24/7 now.
We have some great ladies from church who have been coming over and helping out, along with some family members, but we still have a lot of time unaccounted for.
We are in the process of hiring some other caregivers to fill in the gaps and should have that all straightened out by next week.
In the meantime, my dad has his hands full!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 23, 2014>
Mom is becoming somewhat of a hoarder.
If you are a regular reader then you have probably read my posts about her addiction to Bath & Body Works.
Her hoarding doesn't stop at Bath & Body Works products.
If she doesn't have at least 2 gallons of milk in the fridge or 3 full jars of jelly on hand or 3 loaves of bread on the counter, she doesn't have enough.
Her make-up in another problem.
For days, mom has been hounding dad to take her to buy more make-up.
While I was at her house yesterday, dad came home (I'll share all of yesterday's adventures in another post) and dad asked me if I could help him organize her make-up drawer, since I am the "master organizer" of the family.
As he started pulling her make-up out of her drawer, I started chuckling.
I just couldn't pass up the opportunity to capture this on camera.
Do you think she needs more make-up??
She had at least a dozen mascaras (not counting the ones we tossed), almost that many foundations, probably close to 3 dozen eyeshadows and just as many lip products.
I lost track of how many eye sponges and brushes she had.
When all of the contents of her drawer were scattered out onto the counter, I gave her drawer a good wipe down; it was covered in broken bits of eyeshadow and loose face powder.
I washed off each of her make-up items, organized them back in the drawer, and tossed a lot of empty tubes and broken packages.
This was the end result.
I'm not sure how long it will stay this neat and organized.
But one thing is for sure: if the world went mad tomorrow and make-up was no longer available, mom would have her supply to last a lifetime...and then some!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, September 19, 2014>
Yesterday I teased you all with a post about my brilliant, crazy idea.
I gave you a little background and foreshadowing and then I left you hanging until today.
I thought it was a little much to write all in one post.
And I also wanted you all to be as excited as I am about it.
I can't quite explain it, but ever since my mom's diagnosis I've had this prompting to be proactive in the dementia community.
I think I've shared one experience before, where I had this distinct thought that I could either let this trial overcome me or I could try to learn something from all of this and do something positive in spite of it.
Little by little, I've become proactive and involved in the dementia community; from my blogs to joining the Walk to End Alzheimer's.
But I still feel like there's something more I could (or should) be doing to help families affected by this cruel disease.
I've been sitting on this idea for more than a year now.
I made mention of it earlier this year to my sister, Christina.
Though she liked the idea, I held myself back from going forward with it due to my doubts and fears of failure.
I had those same doubts about writing this blog.
I remember when I published by first post; my stomach was a ball of knots.
I didn't know how people would receive my blog, of my sharing such a difficult and personal journey.
I remembering telling myself it was mostly for me and my family anyway-to keep everyone up to speed; nobody else would care what I had to say.
Two years later, with nearly 55,000 blog views, I get emails from people around the world thanking me for sharing our story.
I never would've guessed I could reach so many people.
And to think I almost didn't go through with it.
I don't want that fear of failure to hold me back from potentially accomplishing a great work.
And so, it is with much excitement (and fear) that I announce to you all my plans to move forward with establishing a foundation in my mother's name; afterall, it is she who has inspired me and prompted me to do this work (the official name is still to be determined).
This foundation will be unique in the dementia community because the target is not to raise money for research and a cure.
Rather, this foundation will be established specifically to help families like ours, who are stuck in the middle class with no means or support to care for their loved ones.
Through sponsors and fundraisers, I would like to issue caregiving grants to those people who have limited options on the table to care for their loved one.
We know the heartbreak and the stress that caregiving can bring to a family; particularly when a loved one is hit at a young age.
I want to help ease that burden for others who are struggling and give them options for care that they can feel confident about.
There are a lot of details to iron out, but I will post all the details as they come.
I estimate that to really get this established, it could take a good year to get going.
I will keep you all updated in the process!
It is going to be a lot of work, and I know a lot of people may think I'm crazy.
This is very much in it's infancy; but I have done a lot of research and know the steps I need to take to get started.
This wasn't an overnight decision; I've been doing my homework.
I have my first 2 board members: Melissa Ballantyne (a family friend, helping on the accounting/financial end) and Christina Avila (my sister).
Both ladies have experience with setting up non-profit organizations (which is how this foundation will be set up) and I'm pleased to have them on my board.
We are looking for a few others to join us as well.
This is partly why I am coming out with this announcement now rather than once it is formally established; if anyone out there reading this post is interested in joining the board or helping in any other way, please contact me.
I'm especially interested in people with experience in marketing, fundraising, etc.
Please keep in mind, however, that it is all volunteer based at this point.
I am now asking for one favor from each and every one of my readers: SPREAD THE WORD!!
Tell your neighbors, tell your friends and family, tell your Facebook community and share this post!!
You never know who could be out there, silently struggling and aching for help.
And you never know who might be out there who can assist in this worthy cause.
In order for this idea to expand, I need to get the word out!
Be watching my page (you can follow me on Facebook if you aren't already); I'll be doing some fun things to encourage my readers to get the word out.
Thank you all for your continued love and support throughout our dementia journey.
Thank you to those who have sent me emails encouraging me and helping me to feel like I'm not alone.
I'm looking forward to giving back to my dementia community!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 18, 2014>
We've known for a while now that the time has come to find outside help for mom.
Some of you might ask why we haven't done that yet; after all, I've been setting aside money from fundraisers for the past year and talking about it even longer.
Let me break this down for you.
Average In-Home Caregiving Company = $20 an hour (average) x's 40 hours a week (that's just the minimum) x's 4 days a week = $3,200 per month Even with the fundraisers I've done, I don't even have enough money saved to pay for one month of caregiving.
Frequently asked question: Isn't there some kind of assistance that will help pay for an in-home caregiver?
Yes, IF you are low income and IF you have no assets (which includes a house).
If you are well-off, you can afford to pay for a nice company to come and care for your loved one.
But, if you are stuck in the middle class, there is no help!!
Story of our life.
I could write an entire blog just on this topic, but I'll spare you the politics.
The fact of the matter is this: if you are an average, middle class family, there is no help.
You have to have nothing to get anything in our society.
The most we can hope for is to find a facility that will accept mom's social security and disability (which is minimal) as payment to LIVE in their facility.
And even then, what will the quality of that facility be?
If we want something nice, we're gonna have to pay for it.
If we want to keep her at home, there is no help financially for the middle class.
It's been a huge source of frustration for me, and I'm sure even more so for my dad as he has the stress and heartache of how to care for his sweetheart and keep her happy at home as long as possible.
I can't tell you how many times I've laid awake at night contemplating the issue; it sounds dramatic, I know.
But until you've been in this situation, it's hard to know the struggle and the heartache it brings.
I know our family is not alone.
There are thousands, perhaps millions, who face this same dilemma.
I have no idea how they do it.
Oftentimes people have to give up the things they've worked hard for their entire lives (houses, cars, etc) in order to obtain proper care.
I've met people who have had to sell all they have and move out of state just to make it work.
This is tragic.
Why can't more be done to help these people?
Why can't the people who have worked hard to make their way in life be rewarded just the same as those who have struggled?
It seems an injustice to me.
This issue has weighed heavily on my mind for quite some time now.
And then it came to me: I had (what I would consider) a brilliant idea.
But every brilliant idea is also a little bit crazy, right?
For those who know me, you know how much I HATE to fail.
Too many times, we let our fear of failure hold us back from potentially accomplishing great things.
If we let that fear hold us back, we can miss out on opportunities that can not only have a huge impact on our lives, but on the lives of those around us as well.
And so, after months and months of deliberation, I've decided that I am ready to move forward with my crazy, brilliant idea.
And I'm going to tell you ALL about it tomorrow!!!
Stay tuned!!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 15, 2014>
Mom's latest "thing" is leaving notes on the door, attached with lotion, to let her caregiver-of-the-day know to leave her alone.
One lady from church wasn't wise to mom's ways yet when she came the other day and she went back home after finding mom's note on the front door.
Word to those caring for mom who may be reading this post: ignore the notes.
While I was in Idaho, my sister texted me a picture of this note that she woke up to find on mom's bedroom door.
Interpretation: "Don't come in now you can't see me naked and Plain Jane."
Dad and I was laughed out loud when we read the note.
This morning, when I arrived at mom's house, I found a similar note on mom's door.
Except this time she "lotioned" it the wrong way and the writing side was sticking to the door.
I would've taken a picture of it because it made me giggle, but I forgot my phone at home today!
I'm sure you can imagine ;) You may notice that there are some misspellings in her words.
I've noticed lately that she has been misspelling words and names of people (even her grandchildren).
If you know my mom at all, you know that this is another down slide.
Mom was always proud of her Spelling Bee status.
If fact, her name hung on a Spelling Bee Champion Plaque at the middle school for years; she was very proud of that.
I'm not really sure if she can still read.
I think she may be at the point where she can read and write what she wants only. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, September 12, 2014>
It's almost time!!
We only have one month left until the Walk to End Alzheimer's!
I'm getting giddy about it.
In fact, I've already figured out our dress code for next year.
I know, I'm a nerd.
But I really enjoy coming all together in support of my mom and all of those afflicted with this cruel disease.
This year is going to be the first walk that my brother and his family will attend, and I'm really excited about that.
We will ALL be together, united for mom!
Let's take a look at some fun pictures from last year.
We sure know how to have fun.
So of course the purpose for this walk is not only to march around with purple hair and stylish t-shirts to show our love and support for those with dementia, but it's to raise money for the Alzheimer's Association who provide a lot of resources and support for the families and individuals affected.
Their programs simply could not run without the generous donations from sponsors.
With that said, if anyone feels inclined to donate to this cause, please visit my page and consider donating!
My goal is to be a champion and I'm only $125 away ($500!!)
CLICK HERE to donate to the coolest Team Dee Captain ;)
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 11, 2014>
While we were taking our trip to Rexburg, I got a call from my sister, relating a phone call she received from my Aunt.
Apparently, my Aunt had gone over to watch mom on that Friday.
She heard the blow dryer going in mom's back room so she decided to check in on her.
If you missed my earlier post about the blow dryer, mom has been burning holes in her clothes as she tries to dry herself with the blow dryer.
When Aunt Claudia walked into mom's bedroom she expected to see mom drying herself off with the blow dryer.
To her surprise and horror, she found the blow dryer laid down on the stool next to mom, turned on to full heat as mom stood by with a knife in her hand, chopping down on the top of her hair in an effort to cut off the pieces that were bugging her (you can catch up on her hair cutting adventures here).
After an unsuccessful search for the scissors, mom got wise and decided a knife might do the trick.
Needless to say, all of the knives are now under lock and key.
On Monday, I went over for my morning with mom.
I heard the blow dryer going, as always.
I was a little wary of the noise given my Aunt's experience the week before.
Sure enough, when I walked in mom's room, the blow dryer was sitting on the stool by itself, emitting intense heat against mom's pant leg as she stood over her mirror, applying gobs of make-up on her face.
I walked over and without any warning to mom, unplugged the blow dryer and hid it away.
While I searched for a hiding place, mom told me I should "support" her and shouldn't be taking her blow dryer away; she was completely oblivious to my hiding place next to dad's side of the bed.
For the rest of the morning, mom was upset with me and mumbled comments such as, "You need to give me back my blow dryer...you should support me...I never did this to my mom..." It was hard and a part of me wanted to make her happy and give her back her blow dryer, but I knew I couldn't give in to her temper tantrums.
I wouldn't give my toddler a knife just because he threw a fit that he wanted it; it's the same scenario with my mom.
The blow dryer has become a hazard.
Fast forward to the next couple of days.
My Aunt and Uncle have been over taking care of mom and have noticed that the shower stall is completely dry.
It seems that without a blow dryer, mom's routine is off and she believes she can't shower.
I brought this up with my dad and he came up with an idea to disable the wire that gives heat to the blow dryer.
He figured most of the risk would be gone with the heat.
He asked if I'd check up on her this morning and make sure that she showers.
I showed up to mom's at 9:00 this morning, right as she was about to start getting ready.
She complained of me being in her room, concerned of my seeing her "naked" and a "plain Jane".
It seemed as though she planned to shower, so I left the room to give her some privacy.
After about 20 minutes, I decided to check in on her since I hadn't heard the shower going.
I found mom halfway dressed with her head in the sink.
Upon further inspection, I found that the shower stall had only a few drops of water directly under the faucet while the rest was dry.
It didn't take long to figure out what mom means when she says it's a "severe shower day".
I am guessing that "severe shower days" means she gets her whole body into the shower to wash off; the rest of the days it seems she must be washing her hair in the sink and perhaps rinsing her lower half in the shower.
I don't know exactly how long this has been going on, but I think the dry shower stall mystery is solved :( At our previous trips to UCLA, they always liked to point out mom's strength.
At the top of the list was her hygiene and the fact that she was still able to take care of herself.
Now that this is slipping, I wonder what is left.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 9, 2014>
A couple of weeks ago, my dad and I loaded up his trailer and drove my daughter up to her new home in Idaho, where she will be attending college.
This new phase of life is very exciting and even more so because she is going to my alma-mater!
It was so much fun reliving memories and traditions of when my parents took me up to college 15 years ago.
We took her to her first dinner in Rexburg at the same restaurant my parents took me too.
We have some funny memories of our dinner there 15 years ago...let's just say our service was horrendous and after our 2 1/2 hour dinner ordeal, my dad left the waitress with a penny tip and a note: TIP: To Insure Promptness.
Yet, we went back.
What can I say?
We love tradition.
My dad and I are both very alike in that; we have a sentimental side that loves tradition.
Luckily, our service was completely opposite this time around and it was fun sharing those memories with Maurina.
We took a trip down memory lane and toured the campus (which has changed a lot) and I shared stories with Maurina about my glory days.
I reminisced about Mother's Week-a week in which all the mothers came to visit their kids at college, went to class with them and attended various activities put on by the clubs and programs.
I have such fond memories of the 2 years that my mom came up to visit me for Mother's Week.
It was bittersweet thinking about them.
Before we left, I tried and tried to get my mom to understand that Maurina was leaving for college.
I wanted to spark her memory of those happy days when she took me off to school, explaining to her that Maurina is going away to the same college I went to, but any memory mom may have is now hidden in a deep place.
She understood my explanation of college about as well as I can understand calculus-which is not very well.
Before we left, Maurina tried to give grandma a hug and tell her she was going, but mom hardly acknowledged her and stood still while being hugged.
Later, Maurina resigned to the fact that "grandma probably won't remember me by the time I come to visit at Christmas."
Though the trip was a little bittersweet, it was mostly sweet.
Even though mom couldn't join us, I will forever have those memories to hold onto and cherish.
I do have to say, I am very grateful for the people who helped out while we were gone on this trip.
I really enjoyed the father-daughter time with dad.
We always have good conversations and fun while we're out...even though people frequently mistook him for my husband rather than my father.
Ha ha.
This trip wouldn't have been possible without my sister and her husband, who spent their nights over with mom, and for my Aunt and church friends who made sure to be there to care for mom while we were out.
It's important for caregivers to get a break, and dad sure needed it!
Throughout our 16 hour drive there and back, we had a lot of time to talk.
We talked a lot about mom and about the future with mom.
We have some really hard decisions to make; or rather, my dad does.
Much has transpired over the past few months and mom is really to the point where she needs more care than we are currently providing.
Yet, we aren't ready to think about a "home" for her.
I honestly don't know if my dad will ever get to that point.
But it's evident that we need to do something more than what we are doing, both to keep her safe as well as to keep her out of trouble.
So...back to the drawing board.
I suppose it's time to look into hired help.
Here are a couple of pictures of the trip we made when my parents took me to college.
The second one was taken during Mother's Week.
And I don't know why I look so wide in the picture; I think it's the dress ;)
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 19, 2014>
Last week, a facebook friend posted a picture of her daughter with a caption lamenting the fact that she had taken a pair of scissors to her beautiful, long brown locks...and the day before school starts!
Her little girl had taken out a good chunk of hair right up to her jaw line.
Mom was upset and by the looks of the picture, her daughter was upset as well; no doubt she got a good reprimand!
I'm sure many people viewing that picture either flinched in horror or chuckled with memories of their own curious, young children.
I've had a couple of close calls myself with my own kids.
But when I saw that picture, it wasn't my kids I was chuckling about.
I almost typed out my comment but then thought about how strange that must sound to all of those reading who don't know me.
Can you imagine a comment reading,  "I had the same problem with my mom this week!
!" Well...let me tell you...it's high time my dad hid the scissors from my mom!
Last Monday (a week ago) I went for my usual day with mom.
I peeked in her room and saw that she was still primping in front of the mirror.
I closed to door quietly to give her some privacy; she hates me seeing her as a "Plain Jane".
Back in the living room, I heard the blow dryer go on and I knew right away that she was likely burning more holes in her shirt.
[Mom gets very sweaty, but she doesn't understand why she is so "wet"; her solution is to use a hot blow dryer to dry herself off.
Consequently, she is burning a lot of holes in her clothing].
I quickly ran back to her room to unplug the blow dryer, much to mom's dismay.
As I turned around, I caught glimpse of mom's toilet...and a huge clump of red hair floating on the water; it was a good amount of hair.
My eyes widened in horror as I turned to mom.
"Mom, you cut your hair!" I exclaimed.
In a bit of shock, I ran my fingers through the back of her hair, noticing the huge chunk that had been cut out above her neckline.
Annoyed that I was touching her hair, mom mumbled, "It's so hot too, I cut this here," she motioned to the back of her hair and towards the toilet, where she had discarded inches of her hair.
Mom's new A-line: She doesn't quite understand why it's not curling so well back there.
I wonder... My Uncle texted me this morning to relate that my Aunt had found yet another clump of hair in her bathroom toilet upon their arrival.
I think we know what needs to be done...hide the scissors!
! 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 14, 2014>
It's been kind of hard for me to write lately.
Not just because I was finishing up summer break with the kids, but because I'm kind of at a loss sometimes of what to write.
Lately, every time I see mom, it seems as though she's slipping farther and farther away.
Her hair and make up continues to get worse and worse (I didn't think that was possible) and her speech is more and more slurred together.
Since she talks about the same 5 subjects over and over, I can usually make sense of what she's talking about; but for the average Joe listening to her it's hard to understand what she's saying.
Last weekend, the kids and I went over to mom's house.
My daughter (9 years old) had gone back into grandma's computer room to say hi.
She came back to me in the living room, a few minutes later, with a somber look on her face.
She looked up at me and from behind her purple, wire rimmed glasses I saw a small sadness in her eyes.
With her lips slightly turned down, she looked up at me and quietly said, "Mommy, grandma doesn't remember me.
She thought I was Marty." [Marty is a lady from church that we've known for almost 30 years...I don't know if that's who she was thinking of, since church ladies come over every week to help, or if she just mixed up names.]
"Did you tell her who you were?" I asked, my heart aching for my little girl that her grandma didn't recognize her.
"Yes, I told her I was Aubrey and then she said 'you're Cassandra's daughter," Aubrey replied.
I hugged Aubrey tightly and tried to reassure her, "See, she remembers you.
She just got confused for a minute." Mom does get confused and after some explanation, she will sometimes remember who people are (particularly our more immediate family).
But I think the days are numbered.
She seems to un-recognize familiar faces more and more often; now with her own grandkids!
In a couple of weeks, I will be taking my niece-daughter away to college in another state.
She's already expressed her concerns that grandma probably won't remember her by the time she next comes back to visit.
:(
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 13, 2014>
Do you ever wish you could rewind the clock?
I think back to 10 years ago, back before I knew many of life's sorrows.
At that time, I was still relatively newly wed, expecting my first baby and the biggest trial in my life was getting through morning sickness.
Sure, there were the normal stressors of life.
But I had yet to lose anyone that was super close to me and life was relatively carefree and happy; I supposed you could say I was a bit naive, not yet knowing the pains of life.
The past few years have taught me much as I've faced the harsh and bitter realities of the world.
Over the past 6 years, some of the things major sorrows I have dealt with include: -the loss of my choir teacher/mentor/very dear friend to cancer -the death of my grandparents -the grisly murder of a close friend, whose murder details and murderer's trial was aired on TV (Travis Alexander, murdered by Jodi Arias) -witnessing/dealing with the stillbirth of my nephew -coming to terms with my mom's diagnosis, and watching her slowly deteriorate day by day A couple things I've learned are:  1.
When you think you have it bad, someone has it worse.
2.
Right when you think it can't get any worse, it can.
This past week my 3 year old son had a tonsillectomy.
I was thinking back to when I was 6 years old and I had my tonsils removed.
I can still see my mom's tear-streaked face as I woke up from the anesthesia; I was frantic and ripping out my IV.
Watching two of my babies now go through this, I can only imagine how my mom felt!
That night, as my son lay on the couch and finally fell asleep after a painful day, I logged onto facebook and a friend messaged me.
"Did you hear about the Stay family?"
she wrote.
"No...what's going on??"
I replied.
"I'll call you," my friend wrote.
Katie Stay was one of my closest, dearest friends.
She was the first real friend I made after I married my husband and moved to Moreno Valley.
She threw my baby showers, we had family dinners together often, we walked everyday to the school together to pick our girls up, we had craft days and play dates with our kids and talked on the phone everyday.
We hosted parties together and were there for all of the important milestones for one another in our lives and our children's lives  (including the adoption of our niece).
Each year, we celebrated our birthdays together by going out to lunch (her birthday is October 6th and mine is the 7th).
Indeed, we became the very best of friends.
We talked about everything together...our joys, our struggles, our hardships with family relationships, etc.
She moved to Texas a few years ago and we've still remained close- talking on the phone, emailing and even mailing cards and gifts to each other.
In the few moments that I waited for my friend to call me and update me on what was going on with the Stay family, I clicked on Katie's facebook page.
My jaw dropped and I let out a cry as I read comments from friends saying "RIP Katie and family."
Confusion, denial, anger, sorrow, anxiety...those are just a few of the emotions that flooded over me as I learned about the horrific murder of my dear friend and her family.
I'm not going to post the details here (google it if you haven't heard, or watch the news).
Suffice it to say, I have been a mess the past few days.
That night, I didn't sleep a wink.
My thoughts kept turning to my friend and her husband, to her 4 children who were killed, to her 1 daughter who survived.
My heart was breaking, my head felt as if it were going to explode and the tears would not stop flowing.
Over the next few days, I laid low at home, in my pajamas, trying to care for my recovering child while mourning the great loss of our dear family friends.
I couldn't imagine what Cassidy (the sole surviving daughter) was going through.
After spending a couple days in the hospital, Cassidy was released and went to a balloon launch/memorial for her family at their nearby elementary school yesterday.
I imagined this poor girl would be a mess, but when I saw her on the news, she had a brave smile on her face and declared that she knew her family is now in a better place.
She encouraged and inspired others to "Stay Strong" during this tragedy and to find the light in the darkness.
I am truly amazed and inspired by this girl's inner strength.
I knew she had it in her (she is her mother's daughter, afterall, and Katie was one of the most positive and optimistic people I've known) but didn't expect it so early on.
I know she definitely has a lot of healing and struggles to overcome in the future, but I think she will continue to amaze us all with her example of strength, faith and hope.
I know this post isn't really related to my mom or dementia.
Maybe it's mostly for me (writing is my therapy).
But if there's one message that you take away from this, let it be one of hope and courage.
Life is hard.
I know that well by now.
But rather than dwelling on those things that can drown us in sorrow, let us rise above these trials and give hope and inspiration to others around us.
That is exactly the example that Katie led in her life; her legacy lives on in her daughter.
My life is better for having had her in it, and though I will miss everyday, I cherish the memories she left me with and the example of goodness that she set.
I have a new resolve to "Stay Strong" in the trials I face, the sorrows I encounter.
I have hope and I have faith that this life is not the end; rather, death is the beginning of something better to come.
'Til we meet again, my dear friends.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 2, 2014>
Today I feel prompted to write a little something about my dad.
He would probably be embarassed that I'm writing this (he's not one to like the spotlight) and he would likely argue what I'm about to say, but I'm writing it anyway.
Lately I've been really touched by his love and devotion to my mom.
There are certainly days where he feels absolutely frustrated with her, and I'm not going to say he doesn't ever lose his patience.
Live a day in his shoes and patience will bring on a whole new meaning!
But I can see and feel, in all of the little things that he does and says, just how much he loves my mom.
Some of these things are a little personal to share, but here are a couple of examples to demonstrate his true love for my mom.
He takes her to Bath & Body Works.
If you are a regular reader, you know what a chore this is.
Furthermore, mom has lost her concept of money so an average trip to Bath & Body Works will cost my dad at least $100.
She likes to do this at least every other month.
I once asked him why he keeps taking her, arguing that he's wasting too much money at that place.
His reply?
"It's just money.
If that's what makes her happy then I'll take her.
I figure there isn't much left that she enjoys, so whatever makes her happy."
It's the same answer when he gives in to taking her to Sam's Club or to Kohl's or anywhere.
He doesn't have to do it.
She doesn't need (or even use) most of what she buys.
It would be much easier to go by himself or put her off.
And as much as he wants to, he always gives in and takes her.
Why?
It is a true act of love that drives him to do it.
Right now, my parents are on [what will likely be] their final vacation to Utah.
I warned my dad against going alone and taking her to Utah; she's very difficult to take out anymore.
On their trip last year, mom wanted to visit the relatives she remembered and after 10 minutes of visiting with each of them, she was ready to retire to her trailer.
Why go through all of that hassle, spend the money and the time to drive 12 hours, out of state hauling their fifth wheel camper?
The answer to me is clear.
LOVE.
My dad truly loves my mom.
He isn't taking this trip for himself (I know he'd love more than anything to take a day of fishing for himself), he is doing this purely for her.
We don't know what tomorrow brings...everyday she forgets more and more and pieces of her life and the people she once knew.
But for today, she wants to take her trip to Utah.
And so my dad does what he can to make my mom happy.
He doesn't think he's doing anything extraordinary, but I am touched and inspired by his example of love and devotion to my mom.
She is truly blessed to have him as her companion.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 1, 2014>
I may raise a little controversy here with this post, but I'm writing it anyway.
A couple of months ago, I wrote about the autoimmune disease that I've been dealing with for the past year.
I've really become proactive in my health and in healing my body and eliminating the debilitating symptoms that the medication is not helping.
I've also written before about my fears of developing demetia.
It's a fate that I do not ever want to inherit.
As I have been reading and researching (and I've been doing a lot of this), I'm learning more and more that there could very well be a connection between our diet/lifestyle and dementia.
I've suggested some of these ideas to some of my family members; most are either in denial or think I'm a little crazy (although they haven't read these books themselves).
I recently read this book, called "Grain Brain".
It may sound silly, but it almost brought me to tears as I read it, thinking about my mom all the while.
If I had only known 7 or 10 years ago what I know today, maybe we could have prevented all of this from happening or at the very least, slowed it down.
There is way too much information that I've studied to relay in one simple post, but if dementia is in your family I HIGHLY recommend you read this book.
And even if it's not...I highly recommend you read this book!
So many of my health issues (including my brain fog and migraines) have gone away after changing my diet and lifestyle.
[You can read more about symptoms and whatnot in my new health blog].
It's true that genetics can play a factor in dementia and Alzheimer's, but it doesn't have to be your fate!
Break the cycle!!
After all of my research, I really do believe there are things you can do to prevent this awful disease from happening.
Nobody knows yet what causes semantic dementia.
What they do know is that a protein in the body "gets loose" and deposits on the brain, eating it away.
But how it gets loose is the mystery.
What I have learned is that food plays a huge role in your body and affects the proteins in your body; foods such as carbs, wheats and sugars in particular.
Of course everyone's bodies are different; some people are more predisposed to certain illnesses, but all of these foods can affect your brain and neurological system.
I've often wondered why there is such a dramatic increase in all of the different health epidemics we see today: obesity, diabetes, heart disease, dementia....what is the common link?
I'll tell you what it is.
Food.
The foods we eat today are so processed and chemically altered and filled with harmful toxins; it's no wonder we are seeing all of these epidemics!
Even foods such as wheat, which are considered healthy, have been so genetically engineered and processed that it doesn't even resemble the wheat that our ancestors ate.
I know from personal experience that by changing my diet, I have eliminated a lot of the health problems I've been dealing with.
I just wish that it wasn't too late for my mom.
I will forever wonder what could have been.
Before you criticize this post, I encourage you to do the research yourself.
Start with this book.
There are many other great books that I have read, but this one spoke to me the most in regards to dementia (it was written by a neurologist, who also happens to be a nutritionist...he has included stories of his own practice and how he has helped people with specific neurological issues they've faced, all by managing diet).
I know this post may get mixed reviews.
Change is hard.
But I feel an obligation to my readers, especially those who worry about their fate to dementia, to share everything I've learned throughout this journey.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 25, 2014>
My mom is losing the concept of how to use a phone.
She never uses her cell phone anymore; I think it's completely foreign to her.
Most times that the phone rings in her house, she doesn't answer.
On occasion, she will look at the caller ID and answer, "Oh, Jones, Jeffrey?
Is this Jones Jeffrey...Cassandra?"
She's become especially frustrated with answering machines.
She doesn't understand the purpose of an answering device and thinks that it is an actual person talking to her.
She talks back into the phone and becomes agitated when nobody will respond to her.
A couple of weeks ago, I took mom to her hair appointment.
I told her I would be there between 2:30-2:40 to pick her up (that was a mistake...she doesn't know what "between times" means).
I left my house at 2:30 and found her waiting, peering out her living room window as she watched for my arrival.
When I returned home later that afternoon, I found two messages on my machine from mom.
This was one of them.
Interpretation: "buhuhubuhuhu (mumbling)...Jeff Jones house too?
I'm trying to call Cassandra?
No, you're not talking to tell me too no?
Uh, darn it."
there was one more message, similar to this in which she gets frustrated that the person on the other end won't give me the phone.
Poor thing thinks she is being ignored! 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, June 19, 2014>
A few weeks ago, mom got a touch of spring fever.
She did some laundry (only hers), washed some dishes and even started the dishwasher.
You can see why dad was not so thrilled about mom's cleaning spree.
Just an fyi: dish soap does NOT belong in the dishwasher.
I'm not sure how long it took dad to get rid of the suds...but I'm fairly certain he's assured mom that he'd be happy to take care of the dishwasher and washing machine from here on out!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, June 13, 2014>
It's that time of year again!
The time that I begin my fundraising for The Walk to End Alzheimer's.
Actually, I'm behind on getting started with this.
Time to get on the ball!
As many of you know, my family has formed "Team Dee" and we walk every year for the Alzheimer's Association in honor of my mom.
We have a lot of fun doing it and it's a way that we all rally together in support of mom and each other.
We always make it fun by having a little friendly competition.
My dad, Aunt and myself always compete to see who can raise the most money.
As of right now, my Aunt is kicking all of our butts ;) It's always a close finish but somehow I still end up on the bottom of the three of us.
I have, however, been a successful champion each year (meaning I've raised over $500).
Our team has been on the top family fundraising list and we DID win an award last year for the Best Dressed team...we will defend our title again this year!
On a more serious note, this Organization is a blessing to many lives.
For the families affected by Alzheimer's and dementia, the Alzheimer's Association provides resources, research, support groups, respite care, etc at no cost to the family.
With the overwhelming costs already associated with this disease, this lightens the burden at least a little.
They wouldn't be able to provide so much without the generous donations of others.
It is a very worthy cause and organization to contribute to.
If you feel inclined to make a donation, please visit my personal page and donate to me.
If you like my dad or another team member better, you can donate to either of them and I'll try not to get my feelings hurt ;) BUT...if you do donate, please make sure it is on one of our personal pages rather than on the team page; if it's on the team page no individual gets credit for it and we're all working for our t-shirts and medals!
We are always welcoming anyone who wants to join our team, you don't have to be family to walk with us!!
If you are uncomfortable with fundraising, you don't even have to do fundraising (although this is the primary purpose of the walk).
My point is, if you want to join in support, it's very low key and we'd love to have you on our team!
We would especially love more family to join with us...we have lots from dad's family joining us, ironically nobody yet from mom's...hint hint ;) Sign up today!!
If you'd like to donate to this cause, please visit my page by clicking here!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 11, 2014>
A couple of weeks ago, my brother came into town (he lives in Arizona).
For mom's birthday, he bought her a gift card to one of her favorite places-Bath & Body Works.
A while back, I instituted a new family rule: If you buy mom a gift card, you have to take her to spend it.
It just didn't seem fair for me to hog all the fun ;) If you haven't gone shopping with mom then you probably don't understand why I am enforcing this rule.
I don't think my brother fully understood the chore it is to take my mom out.
After his experience last week, I don't think he'll be buying her anymore gift cards.
My brother so graciously agreed to let me share his story of his shopping experience with mom.
I've had a lot of adventures with mom, but this one almost takes the cake.
She is definitely getting harder and harder to take out!
I'm posting the link to his blog so you can read it straight from the horse's mouth.
The first part of his post is catching his readers up to speed (if you are a consistent reader of mine, you have already heard most of it).
You can either read from his point of view or scroll down under the asterisks to read about his adventures with mom at Bath & Body Works.
To read Joe's post, CLICK HERE.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 10, 2014>
  Today is my daughter's 9th birthday.
She is my firstborn (biological) child.
I still remember the day she was born; it seems like only yesterday.
My mom had nursed me through my sickly pregnancy and was with me the entire time during labor and delivery.
Never did you see a more proud grandma than my mom!
Dementia has brought many unpleasant changes.
One thing we've been impressed with is mom's ability to remember everyone's birthdays.
[You might remember my post about shopping with mom for birthday cards].
Today we stopped by mom's house to check in with her.
I brought my birthday girl in with me and asked mom if she remembered what was special about today.
When I got no response, pulled Aubrey to my side and told mom it was her birthday.
Mom sat in her computer chair and was fixed on her computer screen, not looking towards me at all.
I continued to prompt her to see if I could spark her memory.
I knew she had a special card tucked away somewhere for Aubrey.
"Mom, it's June 10th.
It's Aubrey's birthday, remember?" "June June, what's June?" mom asked, her gaze never leaving her computer screen.
I pulled the calendar off the wall and presented it in front of her, pointing to the date.
After ten minutes of trying to explain to mom that it was Aubrey's birthday, I finally gave up.
Tears welled up in my eyes but I held strong, not wanting to break down in front of my daughter.
On my way out the door, I said my usual "good-bye mom, love you" and that finally caught mom's attention.
"What, why are you going why did you come so short?" she asked.
"I'm taking Aubrey to lunch for her birthday, it's her birthday today, mom.
I tried explaining that to you," I stated, resigned to the fact that mom would not remember her firstborn granddaughter's birthday.
Mom sat with a blank look on her face for a few seconds and then it finally clicked.
"Oh today is Aubrey's birthday?
Today?
Can I give her that card thing?" she mumbled.
[On a side note, mom's language is becoming very slurred and garbled; this is my translation of her mumblings].
"Yes mom, I know you have a special birthday card for her," I offered as I followed her into her bedroom.
Mom retrieved her pile of birthday cards and looked through each one.
Every family birthday from now until the end of the year is tucked away in an envelope and addressed to the birthday person.
I helped her find Aubrey's card (which was misspelled as "Abry") and she took the card out of the envelope to see if there was a signature.
"Can I do this here too?" she asked.
I handed her a pen and she signed the card as Aubrey sat down on the bed next to her.
She smiled at Aubrey as she gave her the card.
Aubrey gave her grandma a hug and we tried to get a picture with her.
This was the best we could get (mom is rubbing her lips together).
She doesn't understand the concept of pictures anymore.
After we had left, I showed Aubrey the picture of her grandma holding her on the day she was born.
I told her of grandma's pride and excitement at her arrival.
I reminded her of how very much her grandma loved her.
I told Aubrey to keep and cherish that birthday card from grandma forever.
It is probably the very last one that she will ever receive from her.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 9, 2014>
When I started having babies, I always imagined my mom being there for the big milestones in their lives.
I was very close to my grandma while growing up.
She was there for everything...from the smaller things such as birthdays and choir concerts and piano recitals to the bigger life events-my baptism, graduations and weddings.
I suppose I took for granted the fact that I had a loving, active grandma in my life and I naively assumed nothing would be different when I had my own kids.
Every year brings about changes with dementia.
This is the first year that my mom is declining to come to her grandchildren's birthday parties.
While she did come to my son's birthday (in April), she has not made an appearance at any other grandchild's birthday.
This past month, our two oldest girls graduated high school.
This, of course, was a big deal and I spent hours preparing not only for the graduation itself, but for a party in their honor.
Even though the girls are not my children by birth (Amber is my stepdaughter and Maurina is my husband's niece who we adopted), my family has never differentiated them from the rest of our kids.
My parents have always accepted them and treated them just as their own biological grandkids.
I had always imagined my mom being there for these big life moments.
But the concept is gone.
This is the first big milestone that she's missed with her grandkids.
I could not even get her to understand the concept of graduation, let alone get her out to a graduation ceremony or family party.
I admit it was hard not having my mom there with us.
It is becoming a part of life-to not have her there.
Though we are adjusting and accepting the fact that mom cannot be "there" for us anymore, every holiday, every birthday, every life milestone has an emptiness without her presence.
On a side note, this post wouldn't be complete without thanking those people in my life who are always there for me in times when I need them most.
I miss not having my mom here to help prepare for holidays, parties, etc; not just physically, but emotionally as well.
Thank you to the people who are there for me emotionally and a big thank you to my amazing Aunt Peggy and Uncle David who took time off work and drove down from Northern California for graduation week.
While they were here, they made a point to come not only to graduation, but also to my son's baseball game and my daughter's swim meet.
There were here with me all day on Friday prepping for the party and my Aunt stayed up until midnight the night before their drive down to make cake pops for the party.
I am truly grateful that my Aunt takes the time to be there for me and for my children in the absence of my mom.
She's probably the closest thing I have to a mother figure right now and I love her dearly!
Also, my sister-in-law, Amber, spent her entire morning the day of the party to help me out with decorating cupcakes and food prep.
Anytime I have a big event like this going on, she is always there to help.
I appreciate that so much.
And, even though my Aunt Ellen was sick and unable to attend the party, her husband brought by a couple of platters of food.
She had offered to bring something "since [my] mom isn't around to help" any longer.
That was a very meaningful gesture.
Though I will always miss my mom, I am so grateful for the people in my life who try to help fill that void; both those that I've listed and many more that I haven't!
And of course thank you to the rest of the family and friends who came to celebrate with us and shower the girls with gifts and love!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 19, 2014>
About a month or so ago, we went to eat with my parents at mom's favorite place: Miguel's.
Dad ordered mom her usual burrito and mom ate it up.
Last week, my sister and my Aunt took mom out to Miguel's as a birthday present from my Aunt.
My sister called me later that afternoon to give me a surprising report: mom did not know how to eat her burrito.
I know nothing should be a surprise with this disease, but it had only been a month since her last visit.
And what a difference a month makes.
"I don't eat this part, no," mom said, as she laid open her burrito and used a fork to eat the filling.
Despite coaxing and explanations from my Aunt and sister, mom could not be convinced that she was supposed to eat the tortilla.
To make my sister's experience even more eventful, the burrito evidently did not agree with mom.
They were almost home when she motioned to my sister to pull over the car.
She opened the car door (after Christina had pulled over, of course) and threw up the contents of her burrito.
It didn't all make it outside of the car, however.
The upholstery of my sister's new car was sprayed and mom made a mess on her pants.
The smell was apparently too much for my Aunt to handle; it wasn't long before she joined in the action and started to throw up in a bag in the back seat of the car.
Poor Christina!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, May 14, 2014>
This year, Mother's Day landed on my mom's birthday.
Mom has no understanding of what Mother's Day is anymore (last year she still did).
But she sure did know it was her birthday!
We went to church with her in the morning and with everyone person she approached, she told them it was her birthday.
"Today is my birthday and I'm 53, but how old are you?" she asked.
It was too cute.
It reminded me of my kids when they have birthdays- excited to let everyone know about their special day!
She also let us all know that what she wanted for her birthday was money.
Later that afternoon, mom came over for a little birthday celebration.
Only one of her siblings was able to come (her sister, Claudia) as well as my sister's family.
We all feel like this is probably the last year that she will understand the significance of her birthday.
So it was important to us that we got together and celebrated with her.
Of course she didn't eat any of our food; she brought over her "Slim Fast".
But that's okay.
I don't think she really understood what birthday cake was (nor would she eat it), but we lit candles and sang to her anyway.
As we sang, she seemed so happy, a grin appearing on her face.
When it came time to blow out the candles, she had no idea what we were coaching her to do.
The grandkids helped her blow them out.
After we sang Happy Birthday, we tried to get the grandkids to take a picture with grandma (well...half the grandkids, anyway).
We couldn't get mom to look at the camera.
It's been a challenge for a while, but this time there wasn't one shot where she looked at the camera and smiled.
I suppose that concept is lost with many others.
The kids were pretty funny though, pointing at the camera and making noises to get grandma to look at us.
My dad thought he would be funny and he waved a dollar at mom from the opposite side of the table, in an effort to draw her attention towards the camera.
No sooner than mom laid eyes on the dollar than she jumped up out her seat to try and retrieve it from dad.
We were busting up with laughter.
Mom was a bit confused at what presents were.
We led her to the rocking chair and practically forced her to sit down while we hurriedly brought over her presents before she moved out of her seat.
She opened my sister's present first and kept asking what the tissue paper was and what it was for.
My sister knelt beside her and helped her to open the gifts as she showed/explained to her what each item was.
After opening each one, she tried to get out of her seat as we gently sat her back down to tell her there was more.
It reminded me of when each of my kids had their first birthdays.
They hardly knew what to do with the beautifully wrapped packages placed before them.
I coaxed them to tear the paper and eventually ended up ripping the paper off for them.
Once they were done with that gift, they wanted to get up and run around or play with their new toy.
It was with much protesting that I held them down to open their next gift.
That was exactly how it played out with mom.
Only instead of becoming excited about her presents, she would sigh and whine,   "Oh darn it, I really wanted money, I really need money."   [Of course we didn't take it personal; we could only laugh.]
Even though mom was slightly disappointed in her presents, even though she didn't eat food or cake, I think she enjoyed her special day.
It's rare to get her to engage with us these days.
It was nice to have her over and spend some time with her for her birthday.
Happy Birthday Mom!!
I love you!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 8, 2014>
I have been a little inconsistent lately with my blog; I apologize to my readers.
I don't mean to overdramatize anything by writing this post and I'm not seeking sympathy; this blog isn't really about me so much as it's about my mom, but I felt like I could share with my readers why I've been absent.
Last summer I was diagnosed with an autoimmune disease called Hashimotos.
I hadn't been feeling like myself since before my last son was born (he just turned 3) and some things came up during a routine physical last June which ultimately led to the discovery of this disease.
Hashimotos is when the immune system launches an attack on the thyroid, eventually causing full destruction.
Let me just tell you, when the thyroid is in trouble, it wreaks havoc on your entire well being...physical and mental!!
At the time of diagnosis, the doctor told me that they don't know the cause, there is no cure, it's a progressive disease and all I needed to do was take a pill for the rest of my life.
I suppose I put a little too much trust in what the doctor said and it was left at that-me, taking a pill.
The problem is, the pills haven't worked.
Truly, a pill is simply a band-aid for the disease.
It doesn't fix anything.
It's been a rollercoaster and over the past few months my symptoms have reached a peak.
I won't get into it all the details, but let's just say I have been feeling pretty lousy; I have no energy or motivation to do anything (which is NOT like me at all!!
), I have terrible "brain fog" (which has caused me so much worry about developing dementia), anxiety, and the list goes on.
When my last blood results came back as "normal" (while I was feeling worse than ever) I realized that I need to take control of my own health and not leave it solely in the hands of a doctor.
Over the past few weeks, I have been reading everything I can find and get my hands on about Hashimotos and autoimmune diseases.
I've found that diet plays a huge role in overcoming debilitating symptoms and even putting autoimmune diseases into remission.
It's an intense process so it seems like most of my spare time (when I'm not tending to my family) has been spent reading and educating myself, preparing menus and meals, etc.
Needless to say, my blog has been put on the back burner while I figure things out.
I still have a very long way to go, but I will say that I am slowly starting to see changes.
So I feel very hopeful and optimistic that by continuing to make the necessary changes, I can heal my body, gain my life back and kick Hashimotos butt!!!
Now for what you all really want to read about...mom.
Here's an overview of the last few weeks.
The blow dryer is becoming a huge problem.
When mom is finished getting ready for the day (doing her hair and make up), she is often sweaty.
Her solution is to stick the blow dryer under her shirt to dry herself off.
Last Monday, I heard the blow dryer go off and I knew she had already done her hair, so I knew exactly what she was up to.
I raced back to her bedroom to find the blow dryer under the back of her shirt.
And this is what her shirt looked like:   Thankfully she didn't burn herself.
Clearly, it's time to take the blow dryer away.
That is a fight that I know dad is not looking forward to.
Another "event" that took place was removing the lock from her bedroom door.
She is NOT happy about it, to say the least.
Aside from constantly locking my dad out of their room, in the event of an emergency we would not be able to get in there quickly while fumbling with keys.
She's very paranoid about people coming in and seeing her naked, he he.
I keep assuring her that we will not disturb her while she is getting ready in the morning, unless of course there is an emergency.
My dad had a birthday a couple of weeks ago.
We had him over for dinner and despite my urgings for mom to come, she wouldn't budge.
I don't think she remembered it was his birthday until I called her and told her we were having dinner to celebrate (which took a few repetitions before she caught on).
She did leave him a card when she remembered the date and noted that it was only 21 days until her birthday (in actuality, it was only 13 days until her birthday).
Which brings me to another issue: numbers.
Mom is losing her ability to make sense of numbers.
The countdown to her birthday is one example.
Another example is a conversation she had with my dad the other day.
She asked if Jeremy (my nephew) was turning 52 this year.
"No dear, you are 52.
How could Jeremy be 52?" Dad asked.
"No...he's going to be 22.
Yeah, he's in his 20's".
"Dear, he's 10.
He was baptized two years ago when he turned 8, remember?
That means he's 10 now." "No he was baptized when he was 18, he's in his 20's now," mom insisted.
This came as somewhat of a surprise to me, as mom has been pretty aware of all of our ages.
Just one more reminder of how this disease is taking her away from us.
This weekend is her birthday; it falls on the same day as Mother's Day.
I don't think she understands Mother's Day in the least.
Last year she did...but since that time she seems to have forgotten every holiday except Christmas.
She does know that it's her birthday.
With her decline over the past year, we suspect it could very well be her last birthday that she is aware of.
I don't know if she will peel herself away from her computer to spend time with us, but our plan is to have dinner with her and try as hard as we can to bring her out and spend time with us for what could be her last birthday celebration.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, April 18, 2014>
I'm a little late with this post, but this past weekend my baby turned 3 years old.
I can hardly believe it.
Isn't he a cutie?
I'm so in love with this little guy.
As we celebrated Ryder's birthday, I was reflecting back to 3 years ago, as I preparing for his birth.
My mom had been in the delivery room for all her grandbabies up to that point (except for my niece, who was born in Florida).
I anticipated she would be there with me for Ryder as well.
At that time, mom was exhibiting odd behaviors but we didn't have a diagnosis for her yet.
I admit I was a little annoyed with her when the issue of the delivery room came up.
Although she wanted to be there, she couldn't commit to it if I had happened to go into labor in the early hours of the morning because it was "too hard" for her to get up early.
I was hurt, at the time, because it was so unlike her.
Nevertheless, everything worked out when delivery day came.
I ended up being admitted around noon and that worked out nicely for mom.
This was the last grandbaby that mom was in the delivery room for.
Two more grandsons have been born since, and mom wasn't there for either of them.
In fact, she hasn't even met my nephew who was born this past February.
Sadly, she doesn't seem very concerned about it.
It's all part of the disease...it's definitely not the mom we once knew, who was ecstatic to be a grandma.
I am really grateful that, even though I "lost" my mom early on and my kids never really got to know their grandma for the person she once was, she was present for each of their births.
These pictures will certainly be cherished for years to come. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 9, 2014>
At one of my early visits with mom at UCLA, the doctor and nurse practitioner discussed semantic dementia with my dad and me and what it entailed.
One of the difficulties with the disease is obsession about certain things.
Obsessive was definitely a struggle that we had with mom at that point.
For the past few years, mom had been obsessed about quite a few things.
A few things really stand out to me that would drive us a bit crazy which mom would constantly obsess about:1) Her "fibromyalgia" (I put quotes on it because we aren't sure if she was experiencing real pains or if they were phantom pains brought on by the disease).
Mom complained constantly about every ache and pain that she felt and was very exaggerative when she thought she was feeling some sort of pain shoot through her body.
Almost every conversation revolved around these aches and pains.2) Church.
She loved to talk about her Mormon pioneer heritage with anyone and everyone.
She would talk about church/beliefs with anyone she encountered to the point where sometimes it was a bit uncomfortable.
She was determined to bring her friend from up the street, Maria, to church with her.
She was obsessed with The Mormon Tabernacle Choir (she would BLAST the music from her stereo, sometimes singing along).3) Her job.
Everyone she met had to hear the story about what a great teacher she was and how they "picked" on her at work, eventually leading to a suspension and then a resignation on mom's part (of course all of these problems were due to her disease, we just didn't know it at the time).Jill (the nurse practitioner at UCLA) told us that as the disease progressed, these obsessions would slowly go away.
It would be a blessing and a curse: a blessing because we had become wary of so many of these obsessions and conversations; a curse because it just means she is farther into the progression of the disease.A few weeks ago, a realization dawned on me.
These major obsessions have gone away.
There are some other obsessions that have remained; for example, her daily rigid routine, her hair and make-up regime.
She talks about the same things to everyone she sees: how much she is changing in her 50's, how upset she is about not driving, asking people to take her to Sam's Club.
Indeed, those are obsessions or fixations for her at this time.
But those few things that once consumed her and used to drive us crazy the most have nearly disappeared.
Sometimes the changes are so gradual that, unless we look back to compare, we don't realize how much mom is changing.
Most definitely, the disease has progressed a lot in the past 6 months.
The disappearing obsessions being one thing, her appearance being another.
Her eating is becoming worse and worse; her daily menu now consists of: one "Slim Fast" in the morning (which we've swapped with Instant Breakfast to get some nutrition in her), a sandwich (usually pb&j) for lunch, an Ensure for afternoon snack, a Slim Fast for dinner (every 3rd day she will eat a solid meal, either a sandwich or tortellini, and skip the Slim Fast) and an Ensure before bedtime.
Rarely does she deviate from this diet, despite all of our efforts to get her to eat actual FOOD.
Her speech has drastically declined; even more since my last post about it.
All of these changes make me a bit nervous as I sit and wonder, what is lurking around the corner? 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 6, 2014>
Last week was Spring Break for the kiddos.
Spending time with them on breaks makes me reflect back and remember all the fun we had as kids.
My mom always planned trips to amusement parks, to the beach, etc when we were home from school.
I remember staying up late and watching old classic movies with her.
Those memories are precious and I hope to make many memories with my kids that they will someday cherish.
We started out our break with a trip to Disneyland.
Here's a fun picture to share with you :)   After lunch, we went on the Winnie-The-Pooh ride.
As I sat next to my daughter in the "honey pot", I couldn't help but remember the last time I had been on that ride.
My daughter was only a year old and my entire family had gone to Disneyland for my birthday.
My mom was Winnie-The-Pooh's biggest fan.
She was a Head Start teacher and had lots of Pooh shirts, toys, collectibles, etc.
So it goes without saying that she insisted on going on the ride that day.
She was thrilled to sit with her grandbabies, singing and grinning and sharing in the magic of the ride.
Sitting on the ride (back to present day), my mind began to wander a little bit.
Sometimes I can't help but to think about what life would be like if mom didn't have dementia.
I know I shouldn't torture myself like that, but some days it's hard to push those thoughts away.
We used to do so much together as a family.
I found myself wondering, if mom were still "here", would she have been with us that day?
Would she be sitting on the ride with us right then?
I could almost picture her beside me, singing Tigger's song, "The wonderful thing about Tiggers..." There was another night during spring break when my husband went to a hockey game with a friend.
I decided to have a movie night with the kids and that sentimental part of me longed for those days when I had movie nights with my own mom over break.
I wanted to give my kids some culture and expose them to the classics, like my mom did for me.
Our movie pick that night was "West Side Story".
That movie became one of my and mom's favorite movies to watch together.
I found myself, sprawled out on the couch with my kids, singing along to all of the songs as if it had been merely days since I'd last seen the movie, rather than years.
My kids indulged me and seemed amused with my singing and dramatics and it dawned on me: I was becoming my mom!
She used to do the same thing- dramatically sing along to the movie, sometimes with gestures and all!
I can still see her standing in our living room, fist to her chest, chin tilted up with a smirk on her face as she belted out the words (in a fake Puerto Rican accent) to the song "I feel pretty".
In fact, she didn't need the movie rolling in the background to sing that one; she sang that song to me frequently.
I miss my mom a lot; I miss her so much that sometimes (oftentimes) it hurts.
But there are little memories of her everywhere.
I'm so grateful for all the fun memories that she has left me with.
When my kids seem slightly embarrassed that I'm making them wear matching shirts to Disneyland or that I'm being a cheese-ball and singing during our movie nights, I know that someday they will look back at these memories with a fondness in their hearts. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 31, 2014>
Both my dad and my sister shared a funny story with me that was too good to not share with my readers.
This should give you a good chuckle ;) Last week, dad arrived home from work one evening and was greeted by mom.
She was talking a mile a minute as she filled him in on her day.
She was very pleased with herself for accomplishing some chores around the house.
"It was so good too, I washed some dishes too...but something so weird happened, one plate disappeared and one plate broke apart it was so weird.
Come here and see what happened it was so weird..." Mom led dad into the kitchen and dad was trying to make sense of what mom was saying.
He was preparing himself to find a broken dish; wondering how she would have managed to break the dish while washing it.
He peered into the sink and, first, saw one plate washed and drying in the dish drainer.
He then looked into the "washing" side of the sink and saw some sort of mess under the faucet.
He looked a little closer, picked up the mess in his hand to inspect it further, and started to laugh.
Mom had tried washing a paper plate!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 19, 2014>
Part of sharing this journey with my readers is passing along information that I have found helpful.
Recently, I read a book entitled "Confidence to Care" by Molly Carpenter.
This book was written as a resource for families struggling with dementia and Alzheimer's.
It was a very easy read, easy to comprehend and was broken in to chapters addressing different behaviors and difficulties while dealing with this disease.
For somebody who has a loved one in the beginning to mid phases of dementia, this book could be quite helpful in showing what to expect in the disease.
There are also suggestions on how to handle certain behaviors.
I think for many people who are new to dementia or don't quite understand all that it entails, this book would be very helpful and insightful.
Something else that I liked about the book was that it gave dialogue to help guide in dealing with different scenarios.
For people (especially) who are struggling to handle these behaviors, this is incredibly helpful!
With that said, I think the dialogue portion is geared more towards Alzheimer's or dementias other than mom's (which is semantic).
Mom's specific type of dementia makes it incredibly difficult for her to understand most of what we say to her (though it might have been more helpful in the beginning stages).
The dialogue won't really help much in our specific situation.
All in all, if you are new to dementia, or even struggling to understand certain behaviors, unsure of what to expect, etc, I would recommend this book to read.
Like I said, it's easy-not filled with a bunch of medical mumbo jumbo that regular people like you and me can't understand-and there are many helpful tips.
You can find it here at this link and for future reference, I will also list it under my "books to read" tab at the top of the page.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 17, 2014>
Can anyone see what is wrong with this picture?
I was chuckling this morning when I walked into mom's room and found her wearing her shirt backwards.
I tried to tell her, knowing full well that she wasn't going to understand what I was saying.
So I did the only thing I could do...I showed her the tag on the front of her shirt.
It took a minute to get her attention (even with me tugging at her shirt) but she finally looked down at the tag I was pulling out from the inside of her shirt and started to connect the dots...sort of.
"Oh yeah, I was gonna ask you about this if this was right," she said, seeming unsure of how to solve the problem.
I took her arm and tried to show her that it needed to come out of the sleeve and the shirt turned around.
She finally figured it out, turned it around and then went back to her hair curling.
It gave me a good morning chuckle.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 11, 2014>
Part of mom's disease (semantic dementia) is obsession or fixation on certain things.
One of the things she became fixated on early in her disease was going to the LA County Fair in the fall and buying earrings for my sister and picture frames for everyone; not just any ol' picture frames, but specific frames that had each person's name carved out of wood and made into a matting inside the frame.
Years ago, she bought these frames with both her and my dad's names as well as each of her three children's names.
Inside the frame, she inserted a baby picture of each person.
She must have done this right before she was developing her dementia because it was shortly after she had done her own wall that she started buying the frames for each of her children and grandchildren.
Every year a new grandbaby was born, she would wait for months until it was time to go to the fair and buy another picture frame.
One year, she even became obsessed with going to the fair so that she could buy one for her sister for her upcoming birthday.
Every time mom would come to one of our houses, she would hound us about the picture frames.
She wanted to know where they were at, why they were on a shelf rather than a wall, why one of the frames was blank (with no picture).
I remember one holiday season (2012) I had put my picture frames away in order to display my holiday decorations.
Mom was confused at why I had moved the picture frames.
Everytime she came over, she would ask about the pictures and was very disappointed that I didn't have them on display.
"I just put them away for the holidays mom; I'll bring them back out after Christmas," I would explain.
Even after I brought them back out, she was dissatisfied.
You see, I displayed them all wrong.
I used current pictures of my kids, and I hadn't even gotten around to putting a picture in my or my husband's frame.
Mom would usually say something like, "You need to put in baby pictures like I did on my wall, it's so good too.
That's how you're supposed to do it."
Well...for the past couple months I've been working on redecorating the downstairs of my house.
I finally figured out a good wall for those pictures and decided to do it "right", just for mom.
The sad thing is, I don't know if mom will even notice them now; I haven't heard about it in quite a while.
Nevertheless, I dedicate this wall to my mom and think of her everytime I look at it.
What a fun idea to display all of our baby pictures!
I can't wait for mom to come over to my house again and see my new wall.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 5, 2014>
Last night, I was looking through some boxes in our rafters for something I wanted to use for my daughter's school projects.
I found a large ziploc bag filled with letters written from my friends in high school.
I thought it would be fun to look through those again, so I brought them down with me and browsed through them while I sat on the couch watching our evening shows.
I came across an envelope with my name scrawled across the front in red pen.
I recognized the handwriting right away and knew it was from my mom.
What a precious find!
I opened the envelope and took out the letter which, I discovered, was written to me around the time I was 15.
I'm thinking that it was written and given to me at one of our mother-daughter activities at church.
I sat on the couch reading my letter, tears streaming down my face, as my husband snored on the rocking chair beside me (he will deny that).
I was so touched as I read her words and it made me long for my mom to return from her lost little world.
The part that hit me the hardest was when she wrote, "I pray that we will always be close and friends as I am with your grandma." Oh how I long for that too!!
Is it okay to have a feel-sorry-for-myself kind of day every once in a while?
I'll pick myself back up tomorrow ;)
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 28, 2014>
While dad was off in Colorado, helping my Aunt's family, there were some plumbing issues brewing back at home.
Right before he left, dad had noticed that his floors in the kitchen and his back bathroom were feeling warm.
He attributed it to a slab leak in the hot water pipe; he thought things would be okay if he waited until he returned home to go in and fix it himself.
While he was gone, my sister and I were noticing day by day how much worse the heat in the floors was becoming.
It was spreading throughout nearly the entire living room.
Despite the cool, 70 degree weather outside, the inside of the house felt like a sauna climbing to temperatures above 80 degrees.
When I looked on the side of dad's house, water was starting to flood the planters.
I was worried that the leak needed attention before dad was able to come home.
By Monday night, dad decided to call in a plumber.
He set it up for the plumber to come over the following day, mid-morning.
He must have missed the mid-morning part, because at 7:00 in the morning dad received a call that the plumber was there.
With dad being gone and a strange man in the house, dad just knew this was going to be a disaster.
My brother-in-law, Melvin, went over right away to assist the plumber and try to reason with mom.
By 9:00, I got a call from my dad (while I was out on a morning walk) that mom was unruly and Melvin needed some back up.
Soon after I hung up with dad, Melvin called.
"Your mom is yelling and throwing things; she's pulling her hair and crying and telling everyone to leave."  Clearly, mom was not handling this well.
Not only was a stranger in her house, but her routine was being shaken up, and mom's entire being centers around her routine nowadays.
I was in the middle of a walk, so I rushed back to my house as quickly as I could and hopped straightway in my car.
By the time I arrived at mom's, she was calmed down a bit.
I found her hidden in her bedroom.
I unlocked her bedroom door, let myself in and sat by her side.
Immediately she let me know how disgruntled she was about the man in her house, "Tell those people they need to leave...they're messing up my kitchen too and Bud isn't going to be happy and they're making so much noise too...." Of course there's no reasoning or explaining the situation to her; her comprehension is lost.
I tried to distract her, "Let's go walk over to Aunt Ellen's house," I suggested.
"No, I usually go to her house on Fridays or Saturdays, I don't need to go today."  Mom eventually went back to her business...putting on make-up, curling her hair and playing her computer games (she skipped her shower which was a good thing because the hot water was turned off).
But every time she heard loud noises she was reminded of the plumber and she banged on the walls to let them know she wasn't happy.
Later on, my sister (who came over between a break from work) and I tried to convince mom to go out to lunch with us, knowing it was a lost cause but trying hard to distract mom.
We also knew that her going into the kitchen to make her peanut butter and jelly sandwich was going to be a disaster.
Yep.
She had another fit when she walked through the living room and saw the mess.
She was upset that the door was open and confused as to why there was a large hose going through her house.
She tried pulling the hose out and closing the front door; we had to physically redirect her.
She tried to move the oven back, knowing that it didn't belong by the trash can and kept saying how mad Bud was going to be when he came home.
The plumber, who was well over 6 feet tall and had a solid frame, became a little nervous of my mom after she came through the kitchen and kicked at him while he was down on the floor and grabbed onto his arm to pull him out of her house.
Melvin had to step in and pull mom away.
She didn't hurt him (her kicks were more like swatting at a fly), but it was enough that the plumber was a little wary that she might actually hurt him!!
There's a lot more I can write, but you probably get the gist of the situation.
It was an ordeal and I hadn't planned on spending that day with her.
But, there's always something unexpected that comes up with dementia.
We are learning how to adjust and deal with these situations.
House emergencies are not our favorite!!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 23, 2014>
I had just sat down in the pew at church this morning with my family when a lady in my ward caught my attention and mouthed the words, "Your mom is looking for you."
I glanced behind me to the doorway which separates the chapel and foyer, and saw my mom.
She was wearing her pink "mother-of-the-bride" dress, which hangs loosely on her now, adorned with delicate beading on top of layers of chiffon.
Underneath her short sleeved dress, she wore a long sleeved, pink cotton shirt.
Thick, white cotton socks peeked out from underneath the hem of her dress.
She wore the only shoes she ever wears: her brown, tennis-shoe-style Skechers that have velcro straps criss-crossing her foot.
Her face was splotched with dark, orange foundation which stopped harshly at her jawline, contrasting her pale white neck and the areas she missed around her eyes and mouth.
Her eyelids were smudged with dark, brown eyeshadow.
Surely, she was a sight to see.
In our church, we separate ourselves by geographical boundaries into wards; think of it like boundaries for schools.
Even though I live five minutes away from my parents, we attend different wards.
At one time, before a boundary realignment, my parents were a part of this ward (so they know many of the church members in our ward); when the lines were redrawn, their neighborhood was put in the next ward over.
However, we do attend the same building.
Our congregation services overlap by 1/2 hour; my parent's ward is finishing up in their class just as our ward is arriving for our main meeting (called sacrament meeting).
Mom always looks for me during this overlap time, so it was no surprise to see her in the doorway looking for me (although usually I catch her in the halls).
To tell you the truth, I think it's sweet that she looks for me and I look forward to her finding me each week at church.
When I saw mom, I stood up and walked toward the doorway (we still had another minute or so until our service started, and I could tell she wanted to say hi).
As I walked towards the back of the chapel, I glanced up and saw a new couple that I had never seen before in our ward (which goes without saying that they don't know me, or my mom).
The husband turned his head towards the doorway and immediately I saw his eyes bulge open in wide surprise as he caught sight of my mom.
He leaned over to his wife and whispered something in her ear and I saw her eyes move towards the doorway as well.
They both looked at my mom, as if she were in some kind of freak show and instinctively I approached my mom and put a protective arm around her, turning her away from spectators.
I gave her a hug and told her I was happy to see her.
Of course she wasn't satisfied with my greeting alone; she wanted to see the kids too.
"Is that Jeff too?
And where's Maurina and Am-Amber, is that them too?"
she asked, peering back into the chapel.
She marched right into the chapel and stood, as the service was beginning and with everyone else around her sitting, in the pew where my family was sitting.
She talked in a rather loud voice, greeting each of the kids and my husband.
I followed in behind her and convinced her to sit down with us for a few minutes.
The opening prayer was given and mom talked right through it, "I used to know so many people in this ward, I don't remember so many people anymore but there was that one man who was a bishop so long ago and his wife too..." she continued to talk as I gently rubbed her arm and whispered to her that they were giving a prayer, suggesting that we should fold our arms and be quiet.
She didn't follow my lead.
Fortunately, a lot of people know my mom and are aware of her situation, so they simply smiled or pretended not to notice; I imagine some might have found it a bit amusing.
But for those people who don't know my mom, I'm sure they were caught a little off guard with this bizarre woman.
After a couple of minutes, mom became restless and told me she was leaving back to her class.
She abruptly got up and walked out of the chapel and when I turned back to watch her exit the room, I saw the couple look her again.
To be honest, I can't blame them for looking twice at my mom; she does stick out like a sore thumb.
Admittedly, if I were in their shoes, I might do the same thing.
I'm not embarrassed or ashamed of my mom in the least; obviously this is something she can't help.
But as the congregation began to sing the next hymn, I found myself blinking back tears for my mom and swallowing a lump in my throat.
My beautiful mother, in her right mind, would be completely embarrassed to be made a spectacle of.
She always took great pride in her appearance.
Thankfully, she is unaware of the attention she attracts when she leaves the house.
I'm not mad that people turn their heads, but it hurts all the same; the pain is for my mom.
This is definitely a learning experience for me.
For one, I have to learn to have a thick skin; no easy task for a girl who was always pegged as being "over-sensitive".
For another, I have definitely learned to think twice before I stare at or make assumptions about a person's appearance.
You never know what battles a person is fighting.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 17, 2014>
I am back from an amazing weekend.
I mentioned in my last post that I was going to Arizona for the weekend for the birth of my nephew.
Yesterday, my twin brother and his wife (who has become my best friend and truly my sister) welcomed their baby boy into the world.
I just had to share this joyous occasion with you all.
He's absolutely perfect.
It was a mix of emotions; it was incredibly amazing to witness my sweet nephew enter the world and take his first breath of life.
I am SO glad that everything worked out as it did and that I was able to to be there.
It is a moment I will always remember and cherish.
Mom was supposed to make this trip with us.
Unfortunately, she is to the point where she hardly comprehends.
I think she vaguely understood that the baby was going to be born.
But she was concerned in staying in my brother's small apartment, where she would not have her own room and would be at risk of being seen as a "plain Jane".
The night before we were to leave, dad tried to help her pack her things.
She was insistent that they go in their camper trailer so that she could bring her milk, food and have a home for all of her personal belongings.
My dad had booked a hotel room and tried many times to explain this to her.
Unfortunately, she couldn't grasp the concept and when she finally understood that the trailer wasn't being taken, she refused to go.
Thankfully, my sister babysat mom so that my dad could come along on this weekend trip to meet his new grandson.
I suppose it worked out that mom didn't go.
It was a nice thought to take her but realistically she wouldn't have really understood what was going on and she would have been stir crazy without her computer games and controlled environment.
It was also nice that dad was able to hang out with us, stay the nights at my brother's house with the rest of us, and not have to stress out about accommodating mom's schedule.
Still...it is sad that we are at this point in life where mom is not able to be "here" for us during these big moments.
That is something I definitely missed as we were all fussing together over the new baby.
When we pulled into dad's driveway this afternoon (to drop him off after our road trip), mom was waiting and peeking out the living room curtains.
She greeted us in the driveway, a smile on her face, happy that dad was home.
I showed her pictures of her new grandson and she asked what his name was (despite me telling her several times as I showed her the pictures).
When I answered her that his name was Zach, she said, "Zach Zach, what do you mean by Zach?
That's not a real name Zach, you know what would be nice is if they named him the same name too-after him too" (meaning my brother, Joe) "that would be real good too."  We all chuckled at that.
I don't know if she'll remember his name, since she doesn't seem to be able to retain any new information these days and she has nobody to associate the name Zach with to help her remember.
But...we will remind her often :)
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, February 13, 2014>
If anything ever happened to my dad, I don't know what the heck we would do!
My dad returned last night from a 7-day trip to Colorado.
Although it was a break for him from his responsibilities with mom, it wasn't a restful trip for him.
Over Thanksgiving break, my Uncle (who is married to my dad's baby sister) was in a serious accident when his truck rolled on black ice.
Though he was lucky to even be alive, the accident has left him paralyzed from the chest down.
As you can imagine, that brings about major life changes for my Aunt, Uncle and their family.
Shortly after the accident, my dad told me that he'd likely be making a trip to Colorado to help prepare the house for my Uncle's return (this was before the subject even came up with my Aunt).
Their entire house has to be remodeled to accomodate his wheelchair and my dad specializes in bathroom remodels.
For the past 5 or so days, he has been working alongside his brother and my cousins to ready the house; in particular the bathroom.
Of all people to have an excuse not to go, my dad would be the one.
But he didn't even give second thought to it (other than making arrangements for mom, of course).
Yep, he's a pretty awesome guy.
Now you know what I mean when I tell you he is one of the most selfless people I know!!
I will tell you this...I am sure glad he's home!!
We've survived the week, but let me tell you...it's been an adventure.
For one thing, mom was very unhappy about having people at her house 24/7.
We worked it out to have some wonderful ladies from church stay with her during the morning hours until she went down for her nap.
Other family members went over to check on her in the afternoon until dinner time and then my sister, her husband, my husband, myself and even my teenage girls took turns spending the night with mom...just in case there was an emergency in the middle of the night.
It wasn't necessarily an easy task, but we were all happy to help out dad and, in a round about way, help my Aunt and her family.
Here are some fun highlights with mom from the week.
She: *Hid from my sister in her bedroom closet *Escorted my husband to the front door and pushed him out (on his night to stay over...I was leaving for home with the kids and immediately after she locked him out, I unlocked the door with my key and let him back in) *Walked in on my brother-in-law (in the guest room) while he was changing, and in his underwear, and started a conversation with him  *Escaped outside during naptime to sleep in the trailer *Darted outside, abruptly, to go on a walk while the teenagers were babysitting (they had fun chasing her and coaxing her to stay in the neighborhood and not up to the store) *Woke my brother-in-law up in the middle of the night to tell him to be quiet (he snores loudly) *Yelled to my brother-in-law from inside her room (when he knocked on the door to let her know he was there) "You can't come in.
Only Bud can see me naked!"
(I'm still laughing about that one) One of the worst nights was Monday.
Mom was itching to go to the store.
Of course dad stocked her up with plenty of bread, peanut butter & jelly, milk and "Slim Fast" before he left, but if there isn't triple the amount of what she needs to get her through the week, it isn't enough!
She had been calling me and pestering me all day to take her to the store.
When I arrived Monday evening, I tried to convince her that she didn't need to go; to no avail, of course.
Mom wouldn't let it go and I was afraid she was going to be unruly for her caretaker the following morning, so I figured I'd leave the kids with my hubby and take her.
I reiterated, over and over and over, that I wasn't going to buy her medication.
Like most everything else, mom either didn't hear or couldn't comprehend what I was saying.
Of course she made a mad dash to the medicine aisle where she ripped open a box of Sleep Aid.
After unsuccessfully trying to get it away from her, I figured I would make it disappear at the check-out stand.
Not as easy as it sounds...mom hovered over the box of pills, waiting until he rung it up so she could put it in her purse.
But I had a back up plan.
I had chosen Mike's check-out line and he was my ally.
Mike's dad passed away a few months ago from FTD and he's one of the cashiers who helps keep tabs on my mom when she comes in.
He knows just what we're dealing with.
Mike took the medicine away and put it behind the register, thinking he could just distract her.
No such luck.
Mom came unglued!
She attempted to reach behind the register and retrieve her medicine.
I finally told Mike just to ring it up and give it to me, which he did, and I put it in my purse.
But that didn't help either; mom tried grabbing my purse and pushing me out of the way to get ahold of her medicine.
Mike remained quiet and calm and told me to just pass it back to him.
He was ready to be the bad guy I suppose.
I tried to explain to mom that I didn't have enough money for the medicine (to which the guy behind me offered to pay for it).
For some odd reason, I thought she might be able to understand that!
Nope!
She started yelling at me that I wasn't supportive of her, and then she yelled at Mike that he wasn't supportive and caused a real big scene.
As the two customers behind us checked out, I kept trying to gently pull mom's arm away to lead her to the car as she yelled at me,  "Owe!
You're hurting me!
Stop!"
Just as I was about to give in and go back for the medicine, embarassed at the the many eyes that were watching us, mom finally threw in the towel and admitted defeat.
Not quietly, I might add.
She grumbled the whole way to the car and made sure I knew that she wasn't happy with me.
I've learned to not take that personal anymore.
Like I said, I'm glad my dad is back :) I know mom is too.
She had a hard time understanding where he was and why he was gone so long.
Even when we explained that he is states away, in Colorado, she demanded that he come home that night.
"No he shouldn't be away from me so long, no.
I miss him too and I'm going to need milk too, he told me he was coming home Thursday" (dad meaning next Thursday) "so he should be home now too."
The past few days were especially confusing,  "I feel like he's divor-icing me, he's been gone so long".
I suppose long trips like this won't happen very often; it was a special circumstance.
I learned this week just how dependent mom is on my dad.
He is her security and it's been kind of hard for her to be without him.
Of course I can't forget to mention that there was a plumbing emergency while dad was gone.
That was the point that mom really lost it!!
I will share that story next week but first...I'm off to Arizona to be with my sister-in-law this weekend as we welcome their baby boy, Zach, into the world!!!
I'll be taking both mom and dad with me so they can meet their new grandbaby. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 11, 2014>
  Part of the problem that comes with frontotemporal lobe dementia is difficulty with speech.
For mom's dementia (semantic) it started with losing her ability to find the right words she needed to use.
She's adapted by using particular words frequently in place of a variety of words.
For example, if something is major, bad, excessive, etc she calls it "severe".
If something is strange, funny, different, unusual, etc.
it is all categorized as "weird".
She says "too" during almost every sentence (often more than once in a sentence) when she can't think of the right words.
Over the past couple of months, mom's language has really taken a turn for the worst.
Her speech is becoming more and more slurred and it's becoming more and more difficult to understand her.
If a person is not familiar with her, they may not understand what she is trying to say.
I am still able to piece together what she is trying to say...most of the time.
I tried to copy down some phrases with her slurring and mumbling, in order to give an example of just how bad it's getting.
But it was very difficult to translate it and write out the sounds she was making.
To give a brief description, she speaks very rapidly and misses a lot of sounds in words.
Some words are completely mumbled into sounds more than words.
She repeats things a lot, as if she is stuttering.
Here's my best attempt in writing her speech (what she said to me the other night when I coughed in front of her):  "Why do you cah-cough like that a-ha-aha-aha you cah-ah-wa-a-ha-wa-ha you cough like that a why do you cough like that too?"
Intprets to: "Why do you cough like that?
A-ha-aha-aha" (making a coughing noise).
The best way to get a glimpse at her language is through video.
Please understand that I'm not posting this to make fun of my mom.
I have many readers whose loved one suffers from the same disease as my mom and are behind her in their progression.
This helps those readers to know what to expect and it also helps my readers who are in the professional field as caretakers or researchers of dementia (such as our UCLA team).
It will be hard to understand what she is talking about.
So here's a little background: as she was stirring her evening dinner (Slim Fast), she was recalling the memory from many years ago when she took me to college (BYU-Idaho, which is a church school).
After my parents had dropped me off in Idaho, they visited my dad's best friend in Oregon.
At that time in her life, she had been gaining weight and started drinking Slim Fast as part of her diet regime to lose the weight.
She often remembers this when she drinks her Slim Fast.
Now...see if you can make any sense of what she's saying.   
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 3, 2014>
Sometimes it's hard to gauge just how much mom has changed in a year.
This blog has been valuable in documenting those changes but for those who don't engage with her regularly, her appearance is the most apparent way to see how much she's changed.
2009/2010 was when we really started noticing the changes in mom.
But only within the past 2-3 years has mom's appearance been changing.
Gone is the sparkle in her eye.
Every now and then it comes back, but her whole demeanor has changed.
Most obvious is her ability style her hair and make-up as she once did.
Mom was always so well put together.
Her hair always had style and laid just right.
Her make-up was always nicely done.
As with all of her abilities, this one is fading fast.
In fact, it's on the fast track over these past few months.
2010           2011   2012     2013   2014   Honestly, the camera flash tames it down just a bit.
It looks much more dramatic in real-life.
Over the past few months, mom's make-up is gradually becoming worse and worse.
She wears harsh, orange lines around her face and hairline from her beige make-up (she insists on buying shades too dark because she doesn't like being white) and sometimes there are dark, uneven splotches on her face.
She's really caking on the eyeshadow and the eyeliner as well.
I'm sure you've read my other posts about her hair... I've tried to help her to tone it down, but unfortunately she doesn't comprehend much of what I say these days.
I've decided that instead of wasting the energy to try and correct her make-up, I will just tell her how lovely she looks instead.
After all, it IS a great thing that she is still putting in the effort!
The day that mom stops wearing make-up is the day we'll know that we've passed the point of no return.
You will always be beautiful to me mom!
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 28, 2014>
Mom might not remember much about holidays, but the one thing she does remember is birthdays.
Somehow, she can remember everyone's birthday and she always has a card ready for the birthday person weeks, sometimes even months, before their special day.
I know it really brings a smile to our family member's faces when mom has a card for them on their birthdays.
Yesterday I had the fun job of taking mom to the Dollar Tree to stock up on her birthday cards FOR THE YEAR.
When dad asked me if I would do it, I didn't think it was any big deal.
I told him to tell her to be ready a little bit early (10:15) so we would have time to walk up there, since she is obsessed with walking wherever she wants to go.
I arrived at mom's house at 10:00 and she had barely gotten out of the shower.
By the time she was ready to go it was 10:45 and we didn't really have time to walk up there and back, seeing how I have to get my son from Kindergarten at noon.
But mom was insistent that she walk at least a portion of the way.
So I let her walk up to the corner of the street, where she then got in my car and drove the rest of the way to the Dollar Tree.
Once at the Dollar Tree, mom went straight to the aisle of cards, her birthday/anniversary list in hand.
She had her list categorized by each month, with each of her family member's names next to the month that their birthday fell in.
On her list were kids, grandkids, one childhood friend, Cheryl, one niece, all of her brothers and sisters, some of their spouses, and most of my dad's siblings (and some of their spouses).
There were a few people she forgot on the list, but I noticed those are the sisters-in-law that live farther away who we rarely see.
At the top of the paper she wrote down a few names to remember for anniversaries: Joe and Natalie, Jeff and Starla, Cassandra and Jeff (don't ask me why she didn't list my sister or any of her other siblings).
There were nearly 30 names in all on her list.
For the next 40 minutes, mom went from one aisle of cards to the next (the men's cards and anniversary cards were on the back side of the aisle rack with the women's and valentine's cards).
She went from one side to the other, going down her list one-by-one (in order), looking for a card for each person in the various card sections.
I bounced between attempting to help mom and confiscating toys that my two year old would pick up and try to open from the nearby toy aisle.
"George...who's George, who did I mean here, George..." mom mumbled, studying her list intently.
"Mom, George...he's dad's brother, your brother-in-law," I explained.
We went through this a few times throughout the trip as I tried really hard to keep patient and explain who each person was (all the while rangling a restless little boy).
When she really got "stuck", I picked up a card for her.
Of course, it couldn't be just any card.
It had to have the word "sister" or "grandson" or "brother" written on the front of the card or else it was no good.
But that was her only requirement.
When we made our way to "June", mom immediately searched for the "grand-daughter" section of cards.
Both myself and my two siblings each have a daughter born within 4 days of eachother in June!
As soon as mom found the cards with the word "grand-daughter" written across the top, she counted out three cards, without reading anymore, and put them in her basket.
She didn't open a single card up to read the inside.
In fact, she picked up an anniversary card for one of the couples which was intended to be from one spouse to another.
When she wasn't looking I switched it out for her, ha ha.
I thought card shopping would be a piece of cake.
But nothing about dementia is a piece of cake!
Aside from splitting my attention between my 2-year-old and 52-year-old, mom had absolutely no concept of the time.
I mentioned earlier that I had a Kindergartener to pick up from school at noon.
Mom was beginning to stress me out after 40 minutes of picking out cards.
Twice, she stopped to count how many cards she had...all 30 of them.
And then she had to compare that to the number of names she had written on her list.
Meanwhile, I was looking at my clock and letting mom know that I had to leave very soon.
I was afraid she'd never finish in time!
"Mom, we need to go.
I have to get Cody from school; we need to get in line..." I said, getting the same response from mom as I would have expected to get from the wall.
No matter how many times I said it, mom simply couldn't comprehend (or seem to hear) me telling her that it was time to go.
By the time I got her to the line, there were five people ahead of me.
Another teller finally opened up another register, and the lady in front of me (who apparently caught on to my struggle) told me to go ahead of her.
I was able to get mom home and over to the school just in the nick of time to get my son from school, but talk about cutting it close!
I think I'm going to have to rethink taking her out shopping on Monday mornings!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 13, 2014>
Today was mom's long awaited haircut day.
She's been nagging me for weeks to take her in, not understanding that "that girl" Crystal (her hair stylist for the past 20+ years) has been on vacation.
When I arrived at mom's house this morning she greeted me at the door (I can't even remember the last time that happened!!)
and was eager to head out the door.
You know that old saying about kids, "you can dress them up but you can't take them out?" Yeah.
That was my mom today.
When we arrived at the salon, Crystal was finishing up on another client; a lady who was probably in her late 50's.
Crystal was curling the back of her short hair, flipping up the ends.
It reminded me of the way mom used to style her hair, about 10-15 years ago.
I loved that hairstyle on mom.
Mom, however, was not impressed with this lady's hair.
As she sat, waiting in a chair behind Crystal, an amused grin spread across her face and she started shaking her head.
She turned to me, still grinning and pointed to Crystal's client, saying (in a very non-whispering voice), "I don't like her hair, no.
That looks so weird, I don't know why older women like to wear their like that too, I don't think it looks so good." My eyes popped open wide and I quietly shook my head at mom and put my finger to my lips to signal her to quiet down.
Mom wasn't reading my cues.
She got up from her seat and walked closer to where I was sitting.
"Even some women at church do their hair like that too but I don't like that.
I don't think it looks so good..." she went on.
Crystal glanced over at me with a little smirk in the corners of her mouth.
I prayed the woman in the chair didn't hear but knew that was very unlikely.
Hopefully she could sense something was a little "off" with my mom and didn't have hurt feelings about it.
When it was mom's turn in the chair, she instructed Crystal about how she liked her hair (no really long pieces in her eyes, she likes the back of her neck shaved, she doesn't like any stray hairs sticking up, etc) and she made some of her usual small talk with Crystal.
I've noticed over the past couple of months that mom has some short hairs sticking up on the center top of her head.
I asked her once if she had tried cutting some of those wild hairs, to which she replied, "I don't cut my hair no.
I go to that girl." I've been trying to solve the mystery of how mom's hairs are so short on the top of her head.
Another thought I came up with was that maybe she had gotten the blow dryer too close.
Crystal noticed the hairs also and asked mom if she had tried cutting her hair.
After getting her to understand the question, mom finally replied, "I get hairs that stick up here too, yeah.
I don't like these hairs like this too, see?"  She held several strands of hair, maybe 10 or so, and held them up to demonstrate how she doesn't like her hair sticking up, and then she pulled the clump out of her head.
Mystery solved.
"Oh no, don't pull your hairs out," Crystal replied to mom.
She tried to redirect mom and teach her not to pull out her hair.
She worked patiently to show mom how to spray down the hairs on her head, by putting some spray on her hand and gently rubbing it across her hair, so that they wouldn't stick up.
It was very sweet that she was so patiently trying to help mom.
Sadly, I think her efforts were in vain; mom is un-teachable.
While Crystal finished curling up mom's hair, mom suddenly blurted out, "Do you still get periods so severely?
I still get them so severe even though my mom and my sister stopped having theirs in their 50's but I don't know why I get them so severe..." On and on she went, talking about her period for the next 5 minutes.
I was so embarrassed that I could only laugh.
Crystal just chuckled and talked back with mom as if she were talking about the weather.
Finally, Crystal was done curling mom's hair.
She fluffed it up and it looked so cute; then she began spraying her hair.
But mom could only see the one rogue hair atop that head of hers.
She grabbed the bottle of hairspray from Crystal, held it one inch away from her hair and began plastering her hair with the spray.
"Let me show you, this is what I do, see?
I do it like this so it stays down." Crystal's eyes bulged just a little bit as she witnessed mom's hair process (this was probably a hairstylists nightmare!
ha ha) but all we could do was sit back and chuckle.
I told mom she looked pretty and tried to get a picture of her.
Crystal got in beside her and urged her to take a picture with her.
She doesn't really understand the concept of pictures anymore; this was all I could get.
On another note...I think it's time to get those "oops" cards out again!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 9, 2014>
There are days that I lament about my kids not having a grandma in the way that I had a grandma, and there are days that I am grateful for the lessons that my children are learning in this journey.
Not that I would ever intentionally choose this for them; I long for them to know my mom and for her to be a grandma to them.
After my mom was diagnosed, I was determined that I would do my best to learn and to grow and make myself a better person despite going through this devastating challenge.
I am determined to pass that attitude onto my children as well.
I am so proud of my little people.
For all of the moments of frustration that I have with them, there are many sweet and tender moments as well.
This week I was able to witness some of those moments as we took care of grandma.
It's not easy for kids to give up their playtime during school breaks to work (especially teenagers!).
But I didn't really give them an option, either.
They know that Mondays are our days to help grandma.
I expected some moaning and groaning as we left to grandma's Monday morning, but much to my great surprise, the kids (particularly the little kids) were happy and anxious to help out.
They got right to work sweeping floors while the teenage girls cleaned up the kitchen and did some dusting.
The little kids worked especially hard cleaning up the leaves that those lovely Santa Ana winds brought in.
They never complained; in fact it was just the opposite.
They were delighted to surprise grandpa with a clean yard and expressed that they felt really good about helping out and giving service.
When grandma sprinted up the street to "Avon Lady's" house, the kids knew right what to do.
They chased after grandma and took her hand, walking (or jogging, rather) beside her the rest of the trip.
I am thankful for these sweet children who are learning so many lessons of love, compassion, acceptance, service...Though they miss out on the ideal grandma experience, they are learning and growing in ways that they might not in another scenario.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 6, 2014>
  I'm a little late on this post.
But I wanted to extend a sincere thank you to all of those who ordered from last month's fundraiser.
The English toffee was a huge success.
I received over 30 pounds in orders and over $400 was raised.
That's a good start!
This month we will be searching more diligently for a caregiver.
It's going to cost a pretty penny and I'm happy to be able to help my dad with whatever I can.
So many of you have contributed and are helping us to make it possible to keep my mom at home.
The English Toffee tastes amazing, but I know many of you ordered simply to be able to help and it means more than you know!
And thank you to my sister, Christina, for helping me make some of this toffee.
Don't be fooled by the picture...my brother only helped in taste testing.
Ha ha.
Thank you to my wonderful sister-in-law, Natalie, who grated all of the chocolate bars (for the last batches) for me, even though standing on her feet at 30 weeks pregnant wears her out.
That is my least favorite part of making the toffee.
I appreciated the help!
During the holiday season, I always like to stop and think about my blessings.
Of course I do this all year round, but most especially at Christmas time.
Though the journey is hard, we do have a lot to be thankful for.
There are many people who give up their time to come over and "babysit" my mom.
Others have taken it upon themselves to come over and mow my dad's yard, do some light housekeeping or drop by meals now and then, just to make the burden a little bit lighter.
You all know who you are.
I am thankful for each one of you for helping to lighten our load.
There's no way I can ever repay your kindness, except to return this service to others along the road.
Thank you all for everything you do.
And now...it's time to think about my next fundraiser.
I have something awesome in mind; I need to work out the details.
It's big, and I worry so much about failure.
But one can never succeed without trying!
Many people have contacted me asking me if they can help.
I am always open to suggestions!
Thank you all again!
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 5, 2014>
One thing dementia will teach you is how to have a sense of humor.
Mom gave us a pretty good laugh tonight at family dinner.
As we gathered at my house and worked together preparing our meal, mom found her usual place at my computer to play her favorite games.
She was quite disgruntled that her reading glasses were left behind at her house.
She asked me if I had glasses for her.
I've worn glasses since the first grade, but they are way too strong of a prescription to meet mom's basic reading-glasses need.
I told her no and we all continued about our business.
I ran upstairs for something and my husband came upstairs and told me I had to go back down and look at my mom.
And this is how I found her at the computer.
Yep.
Mom is a problem solver.
And when she has her mind set on something, she doesn't give up!
She found my sunglasses and thought they were reading glasses.
Nevermind the darkness inside my already dimly lit house.
We were all cracking up at mom's new reading glasses.
After a while, mom took them off, noting that they were "too strong" for her.
Ha ha.
Thanks for the laugh tonight, mom.
We love you!
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 31, 2013>
Another year has gone by.
Christmas wasn't the worst case scenario with mom; she remembered what the 25th represented.
But the changes in mom were very obvious and we believe this is likely the last year that mom will remember what Christmas is.
We decided to just make the most of what we have and I tried really hard this year to adopt an attitude of positivity and focus on what we have rather than be down about what we've lost.
Last year, mom was obsessed with continuing her family tradition of gathering her family together for Christmas Eve.
This year, we heard not one word about Christmas Eve.
As the 24th approached, we made plans to have a more intimate celebration with only my siblings (and their families) and my parents (rather than the usual extended family celebrations from the past).
On Christmas Eve, we gathered at mom and dad's house with our traditional holiday foods and gifts.
Mom didn't understand why we were there."Christmas is tomorrow, the 25th," she said.
We tried to explain Christmas Eve, but the memories have seemingly disappeared.
It took a lot of coaxing and convincing to get mom to sit down and open presents with us.
In spite of the sad reality of the situations, we tried to find the humor and the bright spots of the night.
Mom was really cute (and funny) when she opened her gifts.
With each gift, she looked at it as if it were a foreign object, and then once she figured out what it was, she hurried off to put it in her room where it belonged.
"What is this, what is this?
Huh?
This is the lip stuff, yeah?
The lip, the Mar-the Mary-the Mary Kay stuff too for the lips?
Yeah?
Oh good, oh good I needed this too, that's really good," she said when opening my sister's gift of the Mary Kay Satin Lips set, which she'd been nagging me for for the past two weeks.
Then she stood up and hurried away to her room to put it in the little basket on her counter, beside her empty tubes of lip cream.Each time she took her presents to their new homes, it was hard to draw her back to the living room to open some more.
I was so excited to give her my gift.
I got the idea during mom's hospital stay in the summer.
Her room was cold and the blankets were thin; mom was freezing the whole time.
I wished that she had a nice blanket she could bring along, and so my idea for her Christmas gift was formed.
That month following her hospital stay, my sister-in-law and I took all of the grandkids for a photo shoot.
I selected some beautiful fabric and immediately got to work.
This gift would be one-of-a-kind and I had hoped mom would love and appreciate it.
By the time it was my turn to give mom my gift, she was antsy and did not want to sit down.
I was able to get her next to the couch where she stood and opened my box.
She held the blanket in her hand and said,"What is this?"I told her it was a blanket."A blanket, I'm confused, what's a blanket?"I explained to her the purpose of a blanket and pointed to the pictures of the grandchildren as she still tried to piece together the clues of what her gift was."Oh a blanket," she interrupted, "the thing you put on your bed to keep warm?
Is that what it is, it goes on my bed?" she asked."Yes mom, that's right," I said, holding her back for just a minute longer to show her again the pictures of the kids.
She was ready to put the blanket in it's place.
"See here, mom?
These are the kids, this is Raelynn right here and her name is right next to it.
And here is Ryder," I explained, as I pointed to both the names I had embroidered as well as the pictures of each grandchild.The lightbulb finally went on."Oh the kids, all the kids are on here too, all of the kids are here?" she asked, glancing momentarily at the pictures.
"Yes, all the grandkids," I replied, smiling that she had made the connection."Ok, I'm gonna go now," she said, motioning towards the hallway with her blanket.
Mom took the blanket back to her bedroom and tossed it onto her bed.
My sister found her back there, sitting on her bed, next to her blanket, waiting to take her medicine (which, by the way, wasn't scheduled to be taken for another hour).
That was the extent of our celebrating with mom.
On Christmas morning, we have a traditional breakfast which dates back to when my mom was a kid; her mom created this tradition.
Mom refused to come out of her room to join us.
She did come over to my house later in the day for Christmas dinner with my dad's side of the family.
She brought herself a sandwich for dinner and sat at the computer.
When my Aunts gave her gifts, she told them that she didn't know what those things were and that she didn't need them.
My Aunts, understanding mom's condition, just chuckled and gave her hugs.Though the memories we are able to create with mom are becoming less and less, I embrace the time and the memories we do have with mom.
Though it's not the ideal situation, I do think that someday we will look back on this Christmas Eve with fondness in our hearts.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 11, 2013>
In my last post, I voiced my concerns about whether or not mom would remember Christmas.
So far this year, she has forgotten every single holiday; though she does remember most everyone's birthdays and anniversaries.
Last year, she was very selective about what she did remember about Christmas and she didn't participate in many of the festivities.
So it goes without saying that we've been apprehensive to see what this Christmas season brings.
A couple weeks ago, the weekend after Thanksgiving to be exact, my siblings and I went over to mom and dad's house to put up their Christmas tree.
Mom was in her usual place: at her computer.
We weren't sure what kind of fuss she might make when she saw a tree in her living room.
Would she know why it was there?
By the time we had all finished decorating the tree, mom strolled through the living room on her way to the kitchen.
She didn't notice the tree at all.
I drew her attention to it and asked her if she remembered why we put up a Christmas tree.
"Oh yeah, there were those things too that had the pictures of the kids on it too, the grandkids too and also you kids too when you were kids and I always liked to put those on so good, too," she responded.
She was referring to the many ornaments that have been made over the years bearing our pictures on them.
Mom remembered!!
Over the past week and a half, we've talked about Christmas with her, as a reminder and preparation of the upcoming holiday.
She has told my dad that she needs to go to Bath & Body Works (where else??)
to get my sister's present.
When I was over on Monday, I was talking to her about Christmas, asking her if she remembered, and she commented, "It's on the 25th too." She was also a little annoyed that all of her holiday decorations did not make it out this year; particularly her nativity set.
"I told your dad to get that thing down too, it's way up high, that thing with the thing and Je-Jesus too..." I don't know if she will remember all of the family traditions...the Christmas breakfast that her mom started with her as a child, the Christmas goodies.
I don't know she'll venture out Christmas shopping this year with me or if she'll even understand the concept of presents.
But she remembers the most important part about Christmas-that it's all about Jesus!
I go into this holiday knowing that it is very likely the very last Christmas that mom is aware of.
It can be depressing to think about, and there's still so much she's unaware of; I miss her especially at this time of year.
But after my "Blue Christmas" last year, I'm determined to make the best of the situation, enjoy the moments we have and make her last Christmas memorable for all of us. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 2, 2013>
The holidays are always tough when you've lost/are losing someone you love.
Last year, my mom was very disconnected from all of the holidays festivities.
BUT...at least she knew what they were.
She had at least some faint memory of Thanksgiving.
This year, mom had absolutely no idea what Thanksgiving was.
I tried several times prior to Thanksgiving to prompt her and spark some kind of memory about the upcoming holiday.
I talked about it, explained the food, even showed her the date on her calendar.
When I showed up to her house on Monday with all of the kids (who were out on Thanksgiving break), mom was confused as to why they were out of school.
I tried to tell her that it was because of the holiday that week, to which she responded, "Holiday, what?
What do you mean by holiday, what are you talking about holiday.
I don't know what you're saying." I suppose deep down I knew that it wasn't going to click.
I suppose I just wasn't ready to accept it.
I held hope that once all the family arrived and once she saw all of the foods that it might click.
I spent the early afternoon at my in-law's house before heading over to my parent's house around 5:00 Thanksgiving evening.
Mom, of course, was in the office, playing her computer game.
I asked my family if it had finally "clicked" that it was Thanksgiving; as suspected, mom was oblivious.
In fact, she couldn't quite figure out why everybody was over in her house, though she said it was "real good" that some relatives were around often to visit.
She didn't recognize my Aunt, who she sees a couple of times a month.
She was confused about who my sister was (her darker hair, recently dyed, has mom a bit confused).
I went to say hi to mom in the computer room.
I sat down beside her and she asked why I was there.
"It's a holiday today mom.
It's Thanksgiving.
It's that holiday right before Christmas when you eat all the good foods...remember?" "Hmm?
Holiday what?
I'm confused what you're saying, holiday.
My stupid brain, I don't know what you all keep saying holiday.
My brain is so stupid." Try as I might, I could not bring her back and help her to remember Thanksgiving.
The concept is gone.
Thanksgiving with mom is gone.
Last year, the holidays were hard.
I felt really blue.
It was the first holiday season that I really didn't have my mom there to help me with the food, the planning, etc.
It was the first holiday season that we faced knowing mom had dementia.
But at least she knew what the holidays were.
Seasons change.
Another year has come and gone and dementia has taken more away from us.
While we celebrate what we are thankful for, I am thankful to still have my mom.
But I sure do miss my mom and the way life once was.
I wonder now...will she remember Christmas?
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 25, 2013>
My mom has always looked forward to the day she would be a grandma.
I remember when I was younger- first, dating my husband, and then engaged, and eventually married; mom was excited at the prospect of someday becoming a grandma.
My grandma was the absolute best grandma a kid could ever ask for, with sleepovers and baking dates, back scratches and stories of her younger days...I am very blessed to have such great memories with my grandma.
My mom was anxious to follow in her own mom's footsteps and was determined that she would be the "favorite" grandma.
When the grandkids finally started to come, they were my mom's greatest pride.
She had pictures hanging on her filing cabinets and on her desk at work.
She loved showing off her babies whenever we stopped by for a visit.
She always bought them little gifts and loved spending time with them.
She made up little songs for them and had lots of toys and activities for our visits.
There was no doubt how much my mom loved her grandkids.
I think about this often.
It's hard to not feel "cheated" sometimes for my kids.
It makes me so sad to know that they will never have the grandma experience that I had.
The bond I had with my grandma was so strong...my kids will never know what that is like.
They will never have a grandma for sleepovers, to bake goodies with, to take them out on little dates.
They will never know the woman that my mom once was.
They were too young to remember mom before the dementia days.
Last night, I was tucking my little girl into her bed and I laid down beside her.
We talked about my mom and she pointed out a tender moment from earlier that evening, when my mom had stood behind me at the dinner table and scratched my back for a brief moment.
How sweet that moment was.
Somehow, my perceptive little girl picked up on that and could tell that I longed to have my mommy back.
I expressed to her how much I missed my mom.
Together, we shed a few tears as I told her how very much her grandma loved her and how overjoyed she was when she became her grandma.
I reassured her that it was only the dementia that prevented her from being the best grandma in the universe.
I told her to look for those small moments of love and to cherish them; a smile, a hug, a push on the swing.
Hold those memories tight and know that your grandma loves you.
Earlier that evening (at family dinner), I was standing at my kitchen sink, preparing dinner, and I peered out the window to the backyard.
I saw my mom sitting on a swing beside my 2 year old.
Every now and then she would give him a little push and they looked like two friends, swinging side by side, smiling as they flew up and down.
Swinging just happens to be one of my son's favorite things.
How happy I was that he was able to have that moment with his grandma.
My brother-in-law, who was barbequing out back, noticed this sweet moment too and captured it on video with his phone.
I thought I would share [sorry it's not great quality...but you get the idea]. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 22, 2013>
I always thought my mom was pretty.
She always took great pride in her appearance.
I think a lot of that was due to her insecurities about her fair skin, her red hair, her blonde eyebrows and eyelashes.
She never left the house without a fresh face of make-up on and her hair perfectly put together  (unless it was to pick us up from early morning seminary...in which case she wore her sunglasses).
She always looked beautiful and nicely put together.I remember my mom once telling me, when I was a kid, that she wanted to look good for my dad.
I always thought it was sweet that even after years of marriage, mom wanted to look her best for my dad.
Of course he loved her whether her make-up was on or off, but I'm sure he appreciated the fact that she made the effort to always look her best for him.One of my mom's obsessions now is her looks.
However, it's much more extreme now than it was before the dementia.
She hides away from us until she is no longer a "Plain Jane".
She never worried about us seeing her without her make-up on around the house when we were kids.
She doesn't even like my dad to see her without it nowadays.
She keeps it on at night (her pillow is orange from the residue of her foundation), washes her face in the morning and immediately puts on a fresh face before she steps foot out of her bedroom.
But...she doesn't quite have the talent she once had in doing her hair and make-up.
Those who know her have noticed the change in her abilities.On Monday, like many other days that I have gone over there, I arrived at my mom's house and knocked on her bedroom door before she was "put together".
It usually takes several knocks before I get a response of any kind...if I even get a response at all.
This time, I had a Mary Kay lip mask and balm that she had ordered from me and has been impatiently waiting for.
I used that as bribery for her to open her door for me.Immediately upon opening the door, mom fidgeted with her bangs and shyly turned her face away from me, stating,"I didn't want you to see me like this like a Plain Jane."I reassured her that it didn't matter to me and invited myself in her room.
I stood beside her at her bathroom sink and tried to converse with her as I studied her beauty regiment.
First, she squirted a half-dollar-sized amount of Mary Kay foundation into the palm of her hand (which is highly pigmented...the size of a dime would be more than enough).
She rubbed it onto her face, missing underneath her eyes and not blending into her hairline or jaw line whatsoever.
Next, she took the same amount of a dark tan-colored Maybelline foundation and did the same."Whoa mom, let's rub that in a little better," I remarked, trying to help her blend in the lines.
"I think this color is a little too dark for you," I added."No I need to do this darker too cuz I don't like that I'm such a really white person too.
This is really good too and Bud really likes this color on me too," she said, as she slathered it on."I remember this lady in Corona when we lived in Corona and she taught me us how to do these things really good too..." she told me.
She submerged her powder puff into a container of powder and, without tapping any of it off, patted her face, re-dipping the powder puff after each pat on the various parts of her face (cheeks, forehead, nose, etc).
"My Aunt and Uncle say I look okay too, even though I feel like I look weird and differently too now in my 50's but they say I still look okay too thank goodness, and other women at church too say that I still look good too which is so good too," she continued as she slathered it all on.She turned off the light in the bathroom and turned on a small light-up mirror which sat on her counter."This is such a good thing too.
When Joe lived in that different place I had a different kind of mirror thing like this too and I don't know I don't know I don't know if he has it still too," she said.
She swirled her cheek brush in a bright colored pink blush before vigorously rubbing it on her cheeks."This is my most favorite color," mom remarked, as she applied her favorite navy blue eyeliner.
"And Bud really likes it too, he really likes me this way too," she added.
Mom continued to finish up her face: mascara (which she smudged on her eyelid), dark brown eyebrows and dark, pink lipstick.
When she was finished with her make-up she turned her attention to her hair.
After running the curling iron through her hair, she took not just one, but two cans of hairspray and explained to me that "that girl" who does her hair uses two different kinds of hairspray.
She held the first can an inch away from her hair and sprayed, making her way around her head.
When she came across a rogue hair, she would comb it down and plaster it with spray!
When she was finished, she repeated the process with the second can.
To finish up, mom took a bottle of Bath & Body Works spray and gave her hair several close-range squirts as she narrated,"I tell Bud I put this on my hair too, he likes it too."She opened her blouse and put a few squirts down there as well as sprayed her arms and her hair-again.As I watched my mom throughout this process, my initial reaction was to dive in there and tame down her "look".
But once I realized she wasn't listening to a word I was saying (as I tried to help smooth out that jaw line) I just stood back and watched on.
I admit it was partly amusing but a larger part of it was touching.
I saw that innocence in my mom as she happily put her on make-up in an effort to look good for my dad.
With every stroke of her brush and comment that "Bud likes it when I do this" I couldn't help but to smile at the sweetness of it.
Before, when I looked at my mom, all I could I see were the dramatic lines and colors that were too way dark for her complexion.
Now, I see things a little differently.
I see a woman who wants to look good for the man she loves.
I see love.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 14, 2013>
I really need to stop reading the internet.
My Aunt warned me not to read any more on the internet.
But I didn't listen.
Last June, I went in for my yearly physical.
Disclaimer: it had actually been 2 years since my prior physical and I figured I had better check in on myself.
I had gestational diabetes with all 3 pregnancies which puts me at risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the future, so it's kind of important to get my yearly physicals to make sure I haven't developed the dreaded disease; I try to keep up on that.
After a quick physical inspection, the doctor then asked me a series of questions before sending me to the lab for standard blood work.
One of the questions she asked was, "Are you depressed?" I paused for a minute, caught a little off guard.
If I was being totally honest, sure, you could say I've been struggling with a bit of depression.
For those of you who read my blog regularly, you know what I've been through this year.
I figured it would be almost inhuman to NOT feel some sort of depression.
I was going to answer "no".
After all, it wasn't as if I was unable to get out of bed in the morning.
I had no thoughts of hurting myself or others.
To be put on meds was the last thing I wanted.
There was no reason to be a drama queen about it.
But when I opened my mouth, the word "yes" escaped my tongue.
I surprised even myself.
I explained to her that I had gone through some traumatic events this year and that I was also dealing with the loss of my mother to dementia.
She asked a few more questions ["Are you frequently tired?" "Yes", "Do you have low energy?" "Yes", etc].
She told me that she would add a hormone check to my lab work.
A couple of weeks later, I learned that I have hypothyroidism, meaning, my thyroid is not creating enough hormones.
She put me on medication, told me I could choose to be monitored for a while or choose to meet with a specialist.
Of course I chose the specialist.
So, over the past 5 months I have met with the specialist, had an ultrasound on my thyroid (which revealed nodules), had even more blood work done, had a very painful biopsy which required needles going through my neck and the conclusions are this:  1.
I do not have thyroid cancer (hooray!!)
2.
I have an auto immune disease called Hashimoto's Disease, which basically means that my immune system is attacking/destroying my thyroid.
It's not the end of the world.
I have to take a pill everyday for the rest of my life.
Once we establish the right dose of medication (4 months and we're still working to figure it out!!)
monitoring and adjustments will continue to be needed, as it is a progressive disease.
I will have to have monitoring and possibly more biopsies in the future (ick!).
When the doctor gave me the diagnosis of Hashimoto's disease, he told me, "You can read about Hashimoto's on the internet." [Really???]
I like to educate myself, so I took his advice.
And this time, I wish I hadn't because it brings back one of my greatest fears.
Dementia.
I read that hypothyroidism and Hashimoto's disease can lead to dementia.
Yep, it's true.
Thyroid problems can lead to memory problems.
I even read posts from real people who were experiencing it.
Whether being on the right dose of medication will help or not is yet to be determined; I've read mixed reviews.
Although I did read that it can be reversed with proper medications.
The truth of the matter is this: I already find myself having "brain farts".
This isn't made up because of my findings; for a few years now I've been blaming my forgetfulness on "pregnancy brain" or "mommy brain." And maybe it is.
But every time I think of that evil disease called dementia, my fears settle in.
When I see "thyroid" and "dementia" used in the same sentence, I feel even more uneasy.
I know that fear is no way to live life, but how can I not fear that I will share a similar fate as my mom?
For every time I walk to the cupboard only to stand there with a blank stare, unsure of what I was looking for; for every time a name slips my brain; for every night I forget to sign my son's homework packet; for every time I just don't have it altogether, I worry: am I headed down the same road as my mother?
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 7, 2013>
One of my fondest memories as an adult was a trip my family took to Disneyland about 11 years ago.
I was dating my husband at the time; none of us (siblings) were married or had kids yet.
Life was carefree and easygoing.
My mom loved going to amusement parks, especially Disneyland and my parents thought it would be fun to go together as a family.
We spent the day laughing, cracking jokes, taking funny pictures and just having a great time.
There are a few moments, in particular, of that day that really stand out in my mind.
One memory, which I will always cherish, was at the end of our day.
It was probably close to 11:00 at night, and the crowd was thinning out.
The roller coasters had no line and we were determined to walk on as many as we could before we left the park that night.
I will never forget my dad's excitement as we ran through the empty line of Space Mountain, hopping over bars and rushing to get on that coaster.
I felt like we were all big kids.
We had no worries.
What a fun day we had.
I think back on that memory with great fondness; it is one that I will always hold dear in my heart.
But with it also comes a certain sense of melancholy.
Life will never be like that again.
We will never again have those moments have as a family.
For months, mom has been wanting to go to "that place that we went to so many years ago with Jeff and Starla and it has that really big thing that goes up high...." After delving a little deeper, we discovered that mom was referring to Knott's Berry Farm-an amusement park here in Southern California.
At the beginning of the year, my siblings and I all bought season passes to Knott's.
Dad had already taken mom to Disneyland a few months ago and it wasn't a grand adventure; he really didn't want to take her Knott's Berry Farm.
So he tried to talk us into taking her without him.
As it happens, we had been planning a "family day" at Knott's for the day after Halloween, since my brother would be in town.
I had this bright idea that it would be fun to have the entire family together for a day.
But...my dad was less than enthusiastic about my plan.
In fact, he wasn't planning on coming at all.
For an entire month, I tried to convince my dad to come along.
I promised him we would all help with mom and that he would have fun spending time with his kids and grandkids, just like the good ol' days.
He was resistant, up until the morning we were planning to go.
At last minute, he decided he would bring mom along with us and fulfill her wish, as well as mine.
I knew it was going to be a lot of work with mom.
I know all too well how she is and how she'd behave.
I was under no false illusion that we would have a perfectly magical day, as we had so many years before.
But there's a part of me that is still clinging to the idea of making as many meaningful memories with mom (as a family) that we can and I sense that time is running out.
If mom wanted to go to Knott's, then, in my idealistic mind, it would be perfect for us to all go together.
I could sit here and write to you about everything that went wrong throughout the day.
I could tell you that my mom was very self-centered, that she was on her own agenda, that she waited impatiently for the kids to get through their rides so that we could follow her around the park to find what she was looking for.
I could tell you that, despite our walking around the entire park, mom never did find what she was looking for (her memory doesn't allow her to recognize the very things that were before her that she was so frantically searching for).
I could tell you about how we finally found the roller coaster she wanted to ride (her favorite from times past) and how, at the front of the line, my sister and I had to physically restrain her from pushing through the group ahead of us to get on the coaster.
I could tell you how she became so irate at our holding her back that she was yelling and smacking me and broke my necklace in the process of trying to get free.
I could tell you about our fruitless efforts to get mom on rides that we knew she once loved, her refusal to eat her lunch, the tantrums and the exhaustion of keeping her where we wanted to go.
I could tell you all of those things and more.
I had originally intended on sharing those things in great detail.
Instead, I want to focus on the highlights of the days; the memories that will keep us smiling long after mom is gone when we look back at this family trip together.
Highlight #1: Riding Ghostrider (mom's favorite roller coaster)  After finding the ride and convincing mom that this was the roller coaster she was searching for, and after calming down from my anxiety at the tantrum she threw at the front of the line, this was my best memory of the day.
In those few moments before the ride started, I started to fear that mom might freak out once it got going.
It's a pretty steep ride, and it goes really fast.
However, when I looked over at mom, all fears began to fade away.
As the ride started it's uphill ascent, I looked over at mom to see an excitement in her eyes and a grin at the corners of her mouth.
She looked like an eager child, going on her very first roller coaster and trying to hold back her excitement.
"Are you excited mom?" I asked her, matching her grin.
Mom wordlessly answered me with an expanding grin and sparkle in her eye.
As we went down that first hill, mom couldn't hold back any longer and the smile spread across her entire face, showing teeth and all!
At one point, she put her head down, still smiling, and shut her eyes.
And then something amazing happened.
There was a tiny moment, which I will forever remember, when I glanced over at my mom and I swear I was looking at the "old mom"; the mom who loved roller coasters and knew how to let loose and have a fun time.
To have that moment for even one small second made the entire day worth it to me.
Highlight #2: Moments like these   At one point, mom became anxious and was practically running ahead of us all to find...whatever it was she was looking for.
I suggested to my nephew, Jeremy, to go ahead and walk with grandma.
It was such a touching sight to see that I had to take a picture.
It took almost all day for dad to finally let loose and have fun.
He sat off most rides with mom (despite our efforts to get him to ride while we took a turn with mom).
But at the end of the day, he couldn't refuse Big Foot Rapids, which is my favorite ride.
I got completely soaked and dad laughed his head off so it was totally worth it.
Mom was pretty resistant about going on The Log Ride, even though it used to be another favorite.
She was worried about getting wet.
My sister and I laughed as we reminisced about how it used to be mom coaxing her into riding the log; now the roles have reversed.
Highlight #3: The Bumper Cars Mom kept talking about those "things that go and go like this, bump into each other..." Bumper Cars.
Telling her that it was called Bumper Cars held no meaning for her.
We had to visually show her.
She peered over at the cars and her memory was sparked.
I thought she'd love to live out her dream of driving again, but she was a little apprehensive of how to "work" them.
She seemed content to ride alongside dad in the car.
As we left the park that day, a sentimental feeling settled over me as it really hit that was likely our last trip all together to an amusement park, as an entire family.
As our challenges grow with mom, so do our opportunities of getting out and taking trips.
I wanted to preserve this memory forever and take a group picture, but mom was very anxious to leave.
My mind took me back to that happy, carefree memory of going to Disneyland years ago (and the countless other happy amusement park trips).
And then it hit me why it was so hard for dad to come that day.
Though it is physically exhausting to venture out with mom, the overwhelming emotions that come with it are far more difficult; it is looking back on the good times that have past and facing the harsh realization that things will never be the same again; it is the missing and the longing for those times that hurts so much.
The good days are gone.
Yet, though they are gone, I know that someday I will look back on this day with some sort of fondness of the time we were able to spend together. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 29, 2013>
  With each holiday that passes, we wonder if this is the last time mom will remember that particular holiday.
She has lost memory of those smaller holidays: Memorial Day, Labor Day, even 4th of July.
But as of last year, her memory was still intact for the "bigger" holidays: Halloween, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
If I remember correctly, it did take some explaining to spark her memory about Halloween.
But eventually, she figured out what we were talking about and remembered how we celebrate Halloween.
Saturday night, my parent's church ward had their annual Halloween party and trunk-or-treat.
Dad likes to have all the grandkids come along and be together for some Halloween fun.
I got the kiddos (an myself) dressed up and headed over to my dad's house, figuring we may as well ride over together.
As I walked in the door, I asked dad if mom was going to come with us (knowing full well before I asked that she wouldn't go).
"No, she doesn't understand the concept of why we're going to the church tonight.
I tried explaining it; she says that she's going to church tomorrow and she doesn't know why we're going tonight," dad told me.
I knew it wouldn't do any good to try and convince her, yet I was still determined to try.
I went down the hallway into the room where I knew she was hiding; there she was, sitting at the computer.
"Mom, do you want to go with us to the Halloween party at the church?" I asked.
I explained to her what Halloween is.
I pointed out that we dress up and wear costumes and say "trick-or-treat" to ask for candy.
My sidekick, "Baby Jack-Jack", walked in the room and I showed my mom his cool costume.
Apparently, mom must think that I look like a superhero everyday because she was oblivious to our being dressed up, even when I pointed it out.
The concept is gone.
"Your dad keeps talking to me about this but I don't understand what you're saying," she said, giving me a blank look before returning to her card game on the computer.
Despite all of my attempts to explain Halloween, I couldn't get mom to understand.
I suppose it's just one more thing to add to the list of the things she's forgotten.
Forgetting holidays is a big one.
If she can't remember Halloween, will she remember Thanksgiving or Christmas?
When she forgets those, what will she forget next? 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 18, 2013>
Last Friday, mom got into a little bit of trouble.
I got the phone call right after I had arrived at my husband's work-I surprised him at the office for his birthday lunch date.
"Where are you at?" my dad asked.
I knew right away what that meant.
"What trouble is mom getting into now?" I asked with a sigh.
Dad filled me in on the details of the past hour.
Mom had a lady from church over "babysitting" her for the day.
She called my dad after mom had revealed that she found some money and had planned to walk up to the store which, as we all know by now, means she is attempting to buy more medicine.
Apparently mom ran out the front door, leaving her caregiver in the dust.
I apologized and told dad I was out (there's no way I would make it in time even if I wanted to).
I hung up the phone, wondering the same thing dad was: where the heck did mom come up with money??
Dad has gone to extra measures to make sure there is NOT money laying around for mom to get happy with.
Yet somehow she found money and was off on her mission.
By the time the hubby and I arrived at our lunch location, I received another phone call from a private number.
I answered the phone, knowing that somehow the call was related to mom.
Yep.
It was Mike from Stater Bros. [There are few cashiers at our local grocery store who are familiar with mom and our situation and have asked for my number to call me when mom wanders in alone.
Mike is extra attentive, as his dad also suffers from FTD].
Mike let me know that mom had wandered in, alone, and was in the medication aisle.
He asked what I wanted him to do and even went so far as to say he could refuse her the sale.
But...that's only if mom chose his check stand and I didn't want her to create a big scene in front of everyone.
I told him thank you for keeping tabs on her and that we'd confiscate the medicine when she got home.
I hung up and tried to focus on my hubby and enjoy our lunch together.
Of course in the back of my mind I was worrying about what was going on with mom.
A few minutes later, I got yet another call.
This time it was my sister.
Apparently, when I was unavailable, my dad called her to see if she could get the situation under control.
Luckily, she works close by, was in-between clients and was able to go track mom down.
When she arrived at the supermarket, she found mom's caregiver-for-the-day standing outside the door (I guess she was afraid of confrontation with mom?
Or she didn't know how to handle the situation?)
Christina (my sister) walked inside just as mom was approaching the check-out counter, medicine in hand.
She walked up to mom, who I am sure gave her a glare as she said something like, "Don't you say anything to your dad about me buying this." Christina stood patiently by as mom proceeded to pay for her medicine.
Mom handed the cashier her dollar bills and the cashier remarked, "Wow, these are some old dollar bills.
Where did you come across these?" My sister glanced over to see an assortment of silver certificate $1 bills, $2 bills and some old coins.
Mystery solved.
That's where mom got the money from: she had found dad's old coin/money collection.
"I'll just take those and pay for it with my debit card," Christina  said, as she retrieved the old money back from the cashier.
Mom was insistent that my sister return her money, but was soon quieted when she realized that Christina would pay for her medication.
As soon as she got what she wanted, she was out the door.
Christina tried to convince her to take a ride home, but mom was insistent on walking.
So my sister followed behind her in her car and made sure she got home safely.
She followed mom into her bedroom and quietly observed her as she hid her loot.
One more disaster averted...at some point our luck is going to run out!
At this stage in the game, we are looking into full-time, professional care for mom.
:( 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 15, 2013>
Some days a girl just needs her mom.
Even when that girl is a grown woman.
Some days a girl just needs her mom.
Like when the neighbor delivers an entire crate of plums on her doorstep; mom would know just what to do with them.
Every summer, mom made homemade plum jam out of grandma's homegrown plums-using grandma's perfected recipe.
Why didn't I think to get that recipe when mom still knew what plum jam was?
Why didn't I pay more attention to the details while I was helping her as a young girl?
Some days a girl just needs her mom.
Like when her kids begin to test the lines; when her teenage girls detest her and all her rules.
The thing grand thing about a grandma is that she is seasoned.
She has been through the tests and the rebellions and the attitudes and the challenges of her own children and passes down her wisdom to them when they've grown.
Mom was so smart.
She studied child development.
In my early mothering years (before dementia), she always knew the right thing to say, the right way to handle a situation.
Some days a girl just needs her mom.
Like when she wants to pick up the phone to share good news, to ask a question or just to shoot the breeze.
This is probably what I miss most.
Having a mom to talk to.
I know I shouldn't complain.
I had twenty-something years with my mom before dementia began to take over.
Some women never even had that long.
I am not the first woman to lose her mom at a young age and I am certainly not the last.
Some days I feel strong, resolved; I feel like I can do this!
I can take care of myself, I can figure out this parenting thing and I'm stronger for not having to rely on anyone.
And other days I feel lost.
How do I navigate without my mom?
Some days a girl just needs her mom.
Today is just one of those days.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 14, 2013>
 This last Saturday we participated in the Walk to End Alzheimer's for the second year in a row.
My amazing Aunt and her husband came down from San Jose once again to join us.
My other Aunt from last year also came as did my sister-in-law and her family and a friend and her mom.
We learned a few things from last year and worked hard to make this year even better than the last.
To start with, we figured out that we could make our own team shirts.
We wanted Team Dee to stand out, so I created these t-shirts and designed my mom's face into the purple awareness ribbon.
I had originally wanted to get them professionally made, but I ran out of time.
I was pleased with how my homemade shirts turned out though.
Also, I wasn't sure last year about how strenuous the actual walk was.
So I hadn't planned on having the kids join us (although my husband ended up bringing them).
This year, we planned on all of the grandkids (minus one) participating and explained to them what we were doing and why we were walking.
I love that we involved them and that they were able to learn the importance of supporting their family.
My nephew, Jeremy, led us in a team spirit chant throughout our walk and all the kids had a lot of fun with that (especially since we bought mega phones to yell through).
We also took note last year that there were awards for the most spirited team as well as the best dressed team.
We tried hard to be the top earning family team, but that dang Pauline's Angels team is hard to beat!!
;) I've told you before, we're a competitive family.
So we wanted to win something.
We knew we needed to stand out.
In case the neon shirts weren't enough, we decided to accent our uniform with the dementia color: purple.
We had purple jewelry, purple wigs, purple hair spray paint and accessories...and we sure did draw attention!
Everyone was stopping us to take our pictures and our efforts paid off.
We won the award for the Best Dressed Team.
When we went up front to receive our award (and get our picture taken), my daughter asked me if we were famous.
Ha ha.
Gotta love kids!
I am very proud of what Team Dee accomplished this year.
We finished with over $4,000 in donations which put us in the #6 spot for the highest earning team.
My dad was ranked at #9, my Aunt at #10 and myself at #13 as the highest individual fundraisers.
Out of about 1,000 who were there walking, I would say that is quite an accomplishment!!
I know many people do not like donating to organizations such as these; they feel that the individuals affected never see a dime of the money.
To each his own; however, I'd like to share a few facts about the Alzheimer's Association that you may not know and which have influenced our decision to walk for them.
1.
The Alzheimer's Association provides resources for families who are affected by this disease.
Whenever you need something, you can call the center and they can direct you where you need to go.
I can't even begin to list all of the resources that one may need in order navigate through this disease.
And they help you get through it all.
I would bet that most people affected with dementia have made a phone call to the Alzheimer's Association at some point in time; if they haven't then it's only because they don't know about it!
Your donations help to fund this.
2.
Along with #1, the Alzheimer's Association has a respite program.
That means they are allotted a certain amount of money (depending on how much they've earned that year) that they put aside to assist families with respite care.
Earlier this year, we received some of that funding and had a temporary caregiver with mom.
While I was at the walk, I ran into the case worker who helped us get on that program.
She recognized me right away (wig and all!)
and asked how my mom was doing.
I gave her an update and told her that we were looking into full-time care.
She let me know that there were still some funds available and that they may be able to help us again.
It's not anything full-time, but any little bit helps!!
Though the help is there for everyone, I feel that we are "on their radar" more because of the donations we've raised for them.
I always tell my kids: "You get what you give!" I feel a little better about getting if I am giving!!
It is your donations that help to fund this and make this possible.
3.
I've been reading a lot of articles lately on how scientists feel they might be close to a break through on Alzheimer's treatments.
In fact, I posted a link last week on an experimental drug used on rats that was successful in treating Alzheimer's (it has yet to be tested on humans).
If we can find treatment for Alzheimer's (which will affect millions), it opens the door for other dementias as well.
All of this takes funding.
Your donations help to make this possible.
Though it can be frustrating at times to raise the money and find the sponsors (I hate asking people for money), I feel good about being proactive and helping in the cause.
Most of all, it feels good to be united in love and support for my mom.
During opening ceremonies, there was a "flower ceremony".
We had all written on different colored flowers to symbolize the person we were walking for.
As we all stood together, holding our flowers for my mom and as I looked around to see so many others rally in support for their loved ones, my eyes filled with tears.
It was a touching moment.
I want to give a BIG thank you to everyone who joined or donated to Team Dee this year.
You have no idea how much your love and support means to us.
It is what helps us get through every day.
I would love to see even more FAMILY and even friends join Team Dee next year ;) Here are some more fun pictures for you to enjoy!
!        
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 8, 2013>
Yesterday was my 32nd birthday.
I started my day like every other Monday: at my mom's house.
At first, mom seemed unaware of the date (she had given me my birthday card over the weekend...she just couldn't wait!)
When I prompted her, she remembered it was my birthday and reminisced about how good she did when she had two babies (I'm a twin).
My husband had arranged for my family to all go out to dinner later that evening and celebrate together.
I wasn't sure if dad had mentioned it to mom, so I decided to give her fair warning and ask her if she'd like to come.
She was very happy to go out to dinner.
"That would be so good, yeah.
And ask your dad too and it would be good to go do that for your birthday even though Joe won't be here but it would be so good.
Yeah.
Where are we going?
To that Tyler Mall place?
Is that where we're going?
That would so good too, yeah..." she rambled, with a sparkle in her eye.
I tried, countless times, to explain to her that we were going to The Old Spaghetti Factory and that we'd be meeting at 5:00 to leave.
Somehow, she had it in her mind that we were leaving at 4:30 to go to Miguels, which is at the Tyler Mall.
It's too exhausting to write out the entire events of the afternoon-the phone calls from mom nagging about leaving and asking me to please call my dad to let him know to be home by 4:30- but suffice it to say that she was very unhappy when 4:30 rolled around and we hadn't left yet.
She nagged and fussed and threw a stink until we loaded into the car to leave.
Then, she was flustered when we drove the wrong way to the mall and even more upset when we pulled up to Spaghetti Factory.
"I don't know why you changed it, dammit!"  The dining experience was the usual with mom: mom, giving her written list of what she wanted to eat to the waiter; mom calling the waiter from across the restaurant, unhappy that it was taking so long to get her food; mom, asking my sister to take her home before the check had arrived.
I've learned not to be bothered by mom's behavior.
It can be a little annoying and even embarrassing sometimes...but it's nothing she can help.
I've learned to find the humor in our situation, like when she sang Happy Birthday to me in full volume as soon as we sat down at the table.
I can even chuckle at her little tantrums.
If I don't laugh, I'd cry, so it's better to just laugh it off ;)  As tiring as it can sometimes be to take mom out, I am glad that she was there.
We try to make the best of it and have fun with her.
Thank you mom, for giving me life and for being such a great mother to me over the years.   
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 2, 2013>
I think you could say I've always been a bit of an entrepreneur.
My parents taught me early on to work hard for the things I wanted in life.
Even at 7 years old, I was putting my creativity and resourcefulness to good use and always had some kind of little "business venture" in the works.
One summer, my cousin came and stayed at our house for a good amount of time and together we sewed hair scrunchies and sold them door-to-door in the neighborhood.
My brother, sister and I would often knock on neighbor's doors and offer them a car wash for a small fee.
My friends and I used to make necklaces out of paper mache and Potpourri from flowers in our gardens which we sold.
You could often find us out on the lawn, used toys and crafts scattered on top of blankets priced with tags to sell to the other neighborhood kids.
I remember one time, the ice cream man stopped by one of our yard sales and I traded some of my cereal box prizes with him for ice cream.
This pattern has followed me throughout my life: as a teenager trying to earn money for my high school choir tours and driving; as a starving college student working to earn a couple extra bucks; even as a stay-at-mom working for some extra Christmas cash.
My parents taught us to never look for hand-outs; HARD WORK is how you get by and help yourself and those around you.
Lately, the money issue has been keeping me up at night; not money for myself or for my immediate family.
I've been really worried about how we will afford the professional care that mom needs.
I know the time is coming that mom is going to need constant supervision.
Truthfully, that time is already here.
We are doing our best to have mom supervised while dad is at work.
We work together as best we can, as a family, to ensure mom is safe.
Right now, mom's care is all on a volunteer basis and it only covers half of the day.
We are never really sure how long our dear volunteers will be able to handle mom.
The time has come that we are exploring all of our options to get mom professional care throughout the entire day while my dad is at work.
The problem?
Cost.
Maybe it's not my problem to worry about.
But how can I help it?
My dad has always been there to help us, how can I not now worry about him?
I worry about how my dad is going to be able to afford a full-time caregiver.
Like I said, my dad values hard work and is NOT afraid to work.
He is one of the hardest workers I know.
But the fact of the matter is that professional care costs more than the average middle-class family can afford.
Yet dad makes "too much" money to qualify for any assistance.
He is too young to retire to take care of mom full-time.
Most professional companies charge around $20 an hour for in-home care.
Multiply that by 40 hours a week and that equates to $3,200 a month for professional help.
To complicate it even more, dad is self-employed which means his income fluctuates month to month.
Finding a solution is trickier than it seems.
There are options.
We can exhaust our volunteer resources.
We could hire someone privately for less.
We could look into a live-in caregiver and exchange living costs for care.
All of these options have pros and cons to them.
One attorney told my dad that our cheapest option is to put her into a home.
It could eventually get to that point, but as of right now that is not something we are ready to do.
Ideally, I know my dad would like to keep mom at home as long as possible (even to the end)...that will only be possible with a lot of in-home care.
And consequently, a lot of money.
I worry about the financial devastation this will bring to my dad.
The emotional devastation is hard enough to deal with.
My dad has always been one of the most hard-working men I've ever known.
He has always been there to help others in need and is a very generous person.
I know he would never let his children go without.
And so I feel that we cannot let dad go without.
Like I said, I am a worrier.
Luckily, I am also a problem solver.
It's impossible for myself, or my two other siblings, to come up with this amount of money from our household budget.
We each have our own families to take care of and support.
We do not want hand-outs.
I, like my dad, value working for the things we have in life.
Even care for my mom.
I am putting my entrepreneur skills to good use.
I've put my head together with my siblings and we have come up with a plan of attack.
We are not going to let dementia defeat us!!!
Every month, we will be doing some sort of a fundraiser.
First and foremost, I want you all to know that the purpose in this is not to be an annoying salesperson!!!
If you like what you see, great!
If not, scroll down and no hard feelings ;) I am not going to pester anyone to buy anything.
What I will do, is post (on my blog as well as my facebook page) every month what we are offering for the month.
I have created a tab at the top of my page specifically for fundraising.
You can click on that tab each month to see what we are offering.
We have some great ideas lined up.
Most of the money earned will go directly to my mom's care fund (which I have already set up).
I say most because I want to think outside of our family a little bit and benefit others as well.
For that purpose, we will donate 10% of every penny raised to the AFTD (Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration).
Like the Alzheimer's Association, the AFTD helps provide resources and research for dementia; unlike the Alzheimer's Association, this organization specifically helps those afflicted with FTD (which is the category mom's dementia falls under).
Also, I like to have a little fun.
:) So, for every item you purchase, your name will go in a drawing for a chance to win that particular fundraising item at the end of the month.
If you share my post on your facebook page, you will also have your name written on a ticket for the drawing...even if you don't purchase anything!
Sound like fun?
:) Our first fundraiser should be up and running by the end of this week and will go through the whole month of October.
You can click on this link to get you there, or you can click on the tab at the top of my page, entitled "fundraising".
Thank you all for your love, encouragement and support!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 30, 2013>
 The other night, my husband loaded the dishwasher the wrong way.
It was just chaos: bowls put in random places, plastic on the bottom rack, cups thrown about in no particular order."Honey, if you want the dishes to get clean, it's better to alternate big plates with small plates," I explained as I rearranged the plates on the bottom rack.
I continued to explain my method of organization for the dishwasher as Jeff stood quietly by.
When I glanced up at him, his eyes were wide, eyebrows raised and a small smirk formed in the corners of his mouth."Are you serious?" he asked.I stared at him for a couple of seconds as I realized what was happening.
I knew what he was thinking before he even said it.I am turning into my mother.
There comes a point in nearly every woman's life where she feels that, in some way, she is becoming her mother.
Sometimes it is realized with disdain, sometimes it is realized with pride.
For me, the realization brings fear.
For every time I insist on the dishwasher being organized a certain way, I think of my mom and her obsessive way of organizing every cup, every dish, every fork.
Nobody else can do it the right way.For every morning that I put on my make-up, I reflect on my mother's obsessive vanity and fear of being a "Plain Jane".For every moment that I thrive on routines and schedules; for every time I count a step when I walk, for every time I notice an ache or pain in my body or worry about a health issue I may face; for every time I say the word "too" or "severe"; for every time my brain draws a blank; for every time I want things done MY way...for all these things, I worry that I am becoming my mom.
Do I share a similar fate?As these thoughts raced through my mind that evening at the dishwasher, I immediately scrambled up the plates.
My husband laughed as I returned the dishwasher to chaos and prompted him to continue as he was doing.Over and over, I am told that semantic dementia is not hereditary.
Yet, with each passing day, as I watch my mom slip away, I can't help but to worry, will I become my mother?
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 23, 2013>
Fall is my favorite time of year.
I love the change of the season and the nostalgic feelings it brings with it:  from the crisp, cool air to the smells of cinnamon and pumpkin and apple baking in the kitchen to the celebrations of the holidays-my birthday, Halloween, Thanksgiving.
With our temperatures in the triple digits over the past month and a half, I couldn't have been happier with the approach of fall.
Yesterday marked the first official day of fall and the past week has been kind to us Californians.
The weather has been cool enough to turn the air conditioning off and to open up the windows and breathe in some fresh air.
The cool air, however, does increase some struggles we've been having with mom.
I've recently written about mom's "happy feet"; mom's latest fixation is to go for walks.
"It's so good for me too...It's such good exercise for me..." she remarks about her 1/4 mile walks to the store or bank.
Now that the weather is cooling down, she is more determined than ever to get out there and go walking.
One benefit of the triple digits was that we could usually talk her out of walking in the sweltering heat!
(Mom hates to sweat).
All that to say, I've tried to nurture this newfound love for walking and have suggested to mom that we go for walks around the block.
Walking is good exercise for her, but I think sometimes she points that out to manipulate us into being less suspicious about her true intentions.
Unless mom has a purpose in mind, she really isn't as interested in walking as she makes herself seem.
Mom has 3 primary purposes to go for walks:  1.
To visit her sister 2.
To walk to the bank in an attempt to withdrawal money 3.
To go up to the store to buy medicines that she's not allowed to have Having people with her every morning has helped immensely.
We now have every morning covered so that mom is monitored during her "happy hour".
Morning has usually been the only problematic time with her; in the afternoon she naps and then wakes up to take medicine and eat a snack while playing computer games.
Mom is pretty unhappy about having people looking over her shoulder every morning.
It prevents her from accomplishing her aforementioned objectives.
It seems that in her determination to get out without an escort, mom is taking drastic measures.
Very drastic.
Mom is now skipping her nap.
Yes, you read that correctly: mom is skipping her naps!!
If you're an avid reader of mine, you know what a big deal this is.
That one thing that has been both a pain in the neck yet a source of comfort at the same time-talking about her rigid routine-is now being broken to bits in her rebellion to get away.
We used to count on the fact that at 12:00 mom eats lunch and at 1:00 she goes down for a nap.
It left only a short window in the morning that mom needed supervision to prevent her from fleeing the coop.
I've heard of mom skipping her naps a few times in the past week.
Today was the first time I witnessed it firsthand.
This morning, I took mom for her long awaited haircut (it's been a while!)
I was relieved when we finished up; it was 12:00- just enough time to get her home, fed and down for a nap before I went to pick up my son from Kindergarten.
On our ride home, mom pulled out her coin purse and began counting some dollar bills.
I knew, from talking to my dad yesterday, where the money had come from.
Mom spent last week scrounging around the house for any change she could find in an attempt to cash it all in at the bank for dollars.
Among her stash were some arcade tokens as well as old coins from dad's coin collection.
I think dad was able to retrieve the valuables before she took the rest of the change up to the bank to cash out the $8 worth of coins she had accumulated.
"Mom, what are you doing?" I asked, glancing over to the passenger seat next to me, watching her count her dollars.
I didn't even need to ask.
I knew very well what was on her mind.
When she didn't answer, I asked, "What are you going to do when you get home mom?
Are you going to take a nap today?" After asking several times, she finally scrunched up her shoulders and gave her head a little shake.
"I don't know, I feel so good too when I walk, I don't have to take naps all the time when I walk too," she quickly said.
"But mom, you haven't gone on any walks today.
Are you planning to go for a walk?" I asked, knowing full well of her intentions.
On our way to her haircut appointment, she had asked me if I would drop her off at the bank on my way home.
And that's only because I arrived to her house early; her original plan was to walk up there before I came over (I caught her off guard when I showed up "early").
When I told her I wouldn't take her to the bank, she came up with Plan B.
Now I faced a dilemma: what to do.
She refused to ride with me to get my son from Kindergarten.
As it neared time for me to leave, she showed no signs of going down for her nap.
In fact, she was in the bathroom putting on lipstick when I left.
Nevertheless, I had to leave.
I decided to drive back to the bank after I picked up my son to see what mom was up to.
Sure enough, as I drove down the street, I spotted mom scurrying along quickly up towards the shopping center.
I pulled the car over and rolled down my window.
Mom was surprised to see me and was quite concerned that I needed to pick up Cody from Kindergarten.
She peeked in the back window to see if he was there (he was).
Then she turned to me and said, "I'm just walking to get some exercise, it's so good for me to be walking up here." Then she mumbled something I couldn't make out and walked away.
I let out a sigh and turned my car around to follow her into the parking lot.
At one point, mom was actually sprinting along the sidewalk; strangers turned their heads to see what the big hurry was.
I stalked mom from my car and watched her pass by the grocery store (after hesitating momentarily at the door) and cross the parking lot to the bank.
I drove ahead of her, parked my car and got my two boys out of their car seats.
I followed behind her to the line and asked her what she was doing.
She ignored me.
When it was her turn to go forward, I followed behind her.
She began talking so quickly it was almost incomprehensible to the teller.
"I want to know can you check this please too and tell me is my disability in there too, they're supposed to give me some money for disability too can you please tell me if it's there please too?" The teller glanced at me, standing behind mom's left shoulder, and I mouthed to her, "She has dementia." The teller nodded and I audibly told her, "She'd like to take some money out." Then, quietly, I added, "Can you please tell her there's no money there?" The teller was very cooperative, understanding my dilemma, and told mom there was no money in the account.
"No?
It's not here yet?
You mean I have no money to take out yet, no?
What about my husband's account?" The teller apologized and told her again that there was no money.
"Oh well I have $8, I hope that's enough," mom said.
And she quickly turned around and darted out the bank door.
I thanked the teller and followed after mom.
Except that I had to put my boys back in their car seats and drive across the lot.
I put a quick call in to my dad, notifying him of the situation.
I was able to prevent mom was draining the bank account but I wasn't able to prevent her from buying the medication.
I caught mom just as she was entering the check-out line, "Sleep Aid" medication in hand.
At this point, there was no stopping her, so I stood quietly by as mom paid $7.08 for her medicine.
I offered her a ride home, but she walked past me.
The only words she said were, "Don't tell your dad I got this, if you tell your dad I bought this I'm going to be so mad at you too.
He doesn't support me, you should support me." And with that she stormed off and started her walk back home.
I started following her back to her house, to make sure she arrived safely, but as we turned out of the parking lot, I saw dad's truck pulled over to the sidewalk.
He had finished work up early and, knowing the situation we were in, waited for mom to follow her home.
I glance back in my rearview mirror to see dad driving alongside her and mom staring intently downward seemingly oblivious to any truck driving beside her.
A while later, I called and checked in with dad.
He reported that he had confiscated the medication and that mom was upset and told him she hates him.
She doesn't know what she's saying; she is throwing a tantrum for not getting her way.
Nevertheless, I am sure it hurts.
It's hard to have to take away freedoms from someone you love.
As hard as it is for me, it's tenfold for my dad to have to do this to his spouse, his partner in life.
As mom's behavior becomes harder and harder to manage, I can't help but to feel anxious and worried about the future.
How long will dad be able to deal with this?
What is our next step?
Will mom be able to stay at home in the long run? 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 16, 2013>
Our family has somewhat of a tradition to gather together on Sunday afternoons for family dinner.
I remember when I was first married and moved away from home.
I looked forward to those Sunday dinners all week; not just for the fabulous meals that mom had prepared, but for the time to visit with my family.
Mom equally loved our Sunday family time together and it was important to both my parents to have their kids gather together at least one day a week.
About 5 years ago, things started to change.
Mom didn't have the same resolve about us getting together.
In fact, sometimes it seemed she was actually relieved if Sunday dinner didn't happen or she'd find excuses to not have it.
Her cooking variety became slimmer and slimmer; in fact, it kind of became a joke in the family, "What will be for family dinner this week...tacos or spaghetti?" Of course mom hasn't participated in preparing a meal for more than a couple years now.
Nowadays she doesn't interact much with the family at all during our time together.
If dinner is at her house, she stays in the office playing Free Cell on the computer; if it's at my house she is on my computer playing her games.
More recently (within the past few months), she hasn't wanted to come over at all when dinner is at my house.
It's been like pulling teeth to get her to come.
Yesterday, family dinner was at my house.
It was no surprise when dad stopped by without mom.
We asked where she was, knowing full well that she was at home.
Dad got a smirk on his face and shook his head, as he told us, "She hid from me." "What do you mean she hid from you?" I asked, thinking she must have just locked herself in her room.
[Disclaimer: It would be much better if dad retold this so that I don't get anything mixed up, but I'll do my best to write it as I remember him telling me].
Dad told us of the events of the afternoon, starting from the time he woke up from his nap in the living room.
He walked back to their bedroom and found that it was locked.
He knocked for mom to answer the door, telling her to open up and that it was time to come to my house.
No answer.
He got the bedroom key and walked into the room.
To his surprise, mom was not there.
He looked around and could not find her.
He looked in other rooms in the house and began to panic a little, wondering if she had escaped somewhere while he was napping.
He went back to his bedroom to find mom on the floor, next to his side of the bed, in-between the bed and the french door.
She was laying down on a pillow.
When he asked her what she was doing there, she replied, "I'm hiding from you.
I don't want to go to Cassandra's".
Dad got her off the floor and she followed him to the kitchen, talking his ear off.
I don't remember what he said was going on in the kitchen, but he said that one minute they were talking and the next minute he turned around and she was gone.
He went to get her; it was time to leave to come over to my house.
He went to her usual afternoon retreat: the computer.
She wasn't there.
He went back to his bedroom and his search came up empty once again.
He called her name.
No answer.
Finally, he made his way into the spare bedroom, thinking maybe she had hid in the closet.
And there, in front of the closet and on the side of the TV stand, mom was crouched down, hands over her head, hiding from dad.
We were all chuckling as dad told the story.
I guess mom really didn't want to come over to my house!!
This is a new one for mom...hiding.
If any of you caregivers are reading this, beware!
Mom just might try hiding from YOU the next time you come over!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 9, 2013>
I am a mom to a very busy, very curious, very independent and strong-willed two-year-old.
He's adorable.
He melts my heart and he brings a smile to my face each and every day.
He also leaves me exhausted by the end of the day.
Especially on those days that I have to take him shopping.
Today was one such day.
We went shopping at Kohl's.
He was adamant that he was NOT going in a cart.
I was able to bribe him for a few minutes with some fruit snacks.
But once those were gone, so was my two-year-old.
He was able to unlatch that cheap seatbelt and climbed right out of that cart.
When he's this determined to stay out of the cart, I give him a choice, "Hold my hand or ride in the cart" and he will choose to hold my hand.
Not today!
He insisted he could walk by himself.
He was like a little Tasmanian Devil, running up and down the aisles, hiding in the clothing racks (pulling clothes off the hangers in the process) and touching anything else that caught his attention.
Many times throughout our trip, I *tried* to pick him up and carry him.
I was sure the police were going to be coming into the store at any given moment on suspected child abduction...that's how big of a fit he threw when I tried to carry him along.
Body wrenching and wiggling, legs kicking and lungs screaming.
Now...add my 52 year-old-mom-with-dementia into the mix and you can guess how my Monday morning went.
Or maybe you can't guess.
Because there's always something new and exciting with dementia.
Preparing mom for her shopping trip was exhausting enough.
Before we left, we spent 15 minutes sitting in her living room as she looked through her wallet for her Kohl's gift card.
Right away she [thought] she found it.
I spent the next 10 minutes trying to explain to her that what she held in her hand was NOT the gift card, but rather the cardboard that was attached to the gift card when it was purchased.
I could have just as well explained it to the couch we were sitting on, with the response I was getting from mom.
She tucked her "gift card", along with her Kohl's coupons (which she was confused about) into an envelope, zipped up her purse and was ready to go.
I try to avoid a scene as best I can when I take her out, so I asked mom to get out her wallet again and find the right card.
No matter which way I tried to explain it to her, she didn't understand and she mostly ignored me.
At one point, as I was trying to explain it to her, I tried to unzip her purse to show her that I needed to look through her wallet to find the card.
Big mistake.
She ripped her purse away from me and glaringly said, "No, you don't get into my purse, no!
That's mine!" I honestly can't even remember how it happened, but eventually I was able to convince her to get her wallet out again and we found her gift card.
She placed it in the envelope along with the cardboard cut out.
Back to Kohl's.
You have the visual of my rowdy two-year-old.
Now, picture my mom, racing around the store looking for something specific; me, chasing quickly behind her while pushing my toddler in a cart (he was just finishing up his fruit snacks), attempting to ask her what she was looking for.
She was up one aisle and down the other as I maneuvered behind her with the cart.
She was much quicker than I was and it's hard to push those carts, so it will come as no surprise when I tell you that she disappeared from my line of vision.
We were in the back of the store, in the home decor section.
I turned up an aisle of picture frames just in time to see mom's red hair flash around the corner.
And then I heard an ear piercing noise.
My first instinct was to cover my ears, but I knew right away that my mom was responsible for setting off the store alarm.
I rushed around the corner to see mom, standing by the emergency exit, one hand still on the door, looking puzzled at where that loud sound was coming from.
I grabbed mom's arm and pulled her away from the door, the alarm screaming so loudly that mom couldn't hear me.
In no time, there was a Kohl's associate rushing to the back door to turn off the alarm.
I apologized for the mistake (once the piercing sound was stopped) and pondered on the irony of the situation: it wasn't my two-year-old that has set off the alarm, but rather my grown mom.
Mom seemed not to notice the commotion she had caused but rather went about her goose chase, calling across the store, "Are you a worker?
?" The sales associate (who had turned off the alarm) came back to mom at mom's beckoned call, and patiently assisted her as mom asked her what her Kohl's coupon mailers were for (not that I hadn't explained it to her at least half a dozen times already!!!!!)
The rest of the shopping trip was fairly uneventful, aside from chasing a feisty two-year-old while attempting to not lose my mom.
By the time we left, I felt ready for a nap!!
I have said this once before and with the holidays soon approaching I will say it again...to all those dear family members (and siblings of mine) who want to get mom a gift card for Christmas (or any other occasion): If you get her the card, you get to take her to spend it!
It's just not fair for me to have all this fun by myself ;)
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, September 4, 2013>
Growing up, my mom was very close to her brother, Jeff.
They are almost 2 years apart in age...to the day.
A couple of years ago, Uncle Jeff moved to Montana.
Mom always expresses her regrets at them moving and always talks about visiting him.
We actually sent her up to visit a little over a year ago, for their birthday.
They haven't seen each other since that visit.
This month is Uncle Jeff's wedding anniversary to his dear wife, my Aunt Starla.
To celebrate, they booked a trip out here to California to visit their favorite places, friends and family.
Mom has been anticipating this visit.
On Monday, we all congregated at my sister's house to visit with Uncle Jeff.
Mom was the last to arrive.
We were all standing around in the living room when mom dashed through the front door.
Immediately she looked around the room and quickly made her way towards the kitchen.
She was on a mission.
"Jeff?
Jeff?" I met her at the kitchen/living room entryway and directed her back to the living room, where Uncle Jeff was standing and chuckling.
"Hello, do you know who I am?" he said with a big grin.
Mom looked right past him and was trying to peek over my shoulder.
"My brother Jeff, Jeff?
Have you seen him?" she said.
I know it is sad that she can't recognize her own brother.
However, it's what we've come to expect with this disease.
We can either cry about it or try to find some humor.
Mom has such a childlike innocence about her that it's hard to not smile sometimes.
It was kind of cute to see her looking around in anticipation and excitement to find her brother.
It reminded me of when people are standing in the airport, peering over shoulders in search of a loved one.
We finally clued her in to the man standing next to her.
"Mom, that is your brother," I said, pointing to my Uncle.
"Huh, Jeff?
You're Jeff?" she said with a grin, nervously tugging at her hair.
"You're looking really differently too." Uncle Jeff gave his baby sister a hug, followed by Aunt Starla.
Trying to get mom to take a picture these days is quite a riot.
Everyone was chuckling as we tried to get mom to pose for a picture.
And more importantly...to look at the camera!
She kept looking away, talking and giggling and we kept calling her name and trying to focus her attention back to the camera-much like you'd do when trying to photograph a baby!
We eventually got some good shots ;)  
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 30, 2013>
I think I've written in other posts that mom's latest fixation is taking walks.
We have concerns with her walking by herself, so to prevent catastrophe, we have "babysitters" over daily to keep an eye on those happy feet.
A couple of weeks ago, on a Friday, a lady from church was over watching mom.
Mom was adamant that she was walking to her sister's house that day (about 1 - 1 1/2 miles down the road) and was quite annoyed that people were over everyday to visit when all she really wanted to do was go for a walk by herself.
This sweet sister from church told mom she would be delighted to walk with her, so off they went on their walk to my Aunt's house.
Once at my Aunt's house, my Aunt told this lady that she would make sure mom got home safely and that she need not stay with her the rest of their visit.
A little after noon time, my cousin drove my mom back home to her house.
Today mom was at it again.
I got a text from my Aunt Ellen to say that mom had walked over to her house.
That same lady from church had gone with her and once they were at my Aunt's house, she left mom to visit with her sister.
My Aunt had planned on driving her home.
However, when mom was ready to go home, Aunt Ellen couldn't find her car keys.
Waiting patiently is not an ability mom possesses any longer.
As my Aunt went to change her clothes and look for her keys, mom slipped out the front door.
Aunt Ellen is disabled, so she was unable to chase after her and she still hadn't found her keys.
Meanwhile...I was picking my son up from Kindergarten and never heard the notification that I had received a new text.
I had just gotten in the door, was trying to cool off from the heat outside and sat down in my chair, thinking of what to make the boys for lunch.
I made a quick phone call to handle a business matter.
As I was on the house phone, my cell phone rang and I saw that it was my other Aunt (Claudia).
I didn't think much about it (she wasn't with my mom today, so I never thought it would be a call about mom) so I dismissed the call as I finished up my other phone call.
When I hung up the phone, I opened up my cell phone just in time to receive a second text from my Aunt Ellen, entitled: "Urgent".
I read through the 2 texts to learn that mom had gotten away before Aunt Ellen could stop her.
I texted her back to ask if she had found her keys, knowing she most likely hadn't, and immediately loaded the boys back into their car seats.
Right as I was pulling out of the driveway, my dad called.
"I'm on my way out the door to look for mom," I said, knowing that was exactly why he was calling.
Dad was frustrated.
This was exactly the kind of fiasco that he has been worried about and has tried so hard to avoid.
He tried calling mom's cell phone, which led him straight to voicemail.
His fear was that mom had become confused on her way back and lost her way.
And with her not answering her phone, it added more stress to the situation.
I tried to reassure my dad that mom getting lost would be the last of our worries.
I worried more about her not recognizing traffic and getting hit by a car, or collapsing from the 100 degree heat.
In our meetings with UCLA, and in my research on semantic dementia, the memory of how to get from one familiar place to the next remains preserved...at least, until the later stages.
However, as I was talking with dad and driving around, I saw no signs of mom.
I drove around the route that I thought she was most likely to take.
Then I looped back around to try the alternative roads she could have turned down.
Still no mom.
I was beginning to get a little worried.
I hung up with dad to call Aunt Ellen to verify what time she left her house; surely she couldn't have made it all the way home yet.
As I made my way around the loop for a 3rd time, Aunt Ellen on the line, I finally saw mom.
Relief swept over me when I saw her face.
I pulled the car over to the curb, where mom stopped and stood by as if she was waiting for me to drive past.
She finally realized who I was and opened the passenger door.
"Oh good, it's so good you were driving here too because I'm so sweaty and tired too and I got lost coming back; I went to Ellen's and I took the wrong way, I went the other way instead of that way and it was so weird too and I couldn't find the right street and then I had to go all the way back around and then I came this way too so it's so good you found me...." On and on she rambled, hardly pausing to breathe, let alone allow me to get a word in.
Over and over I asked, "Where is your phone?
Mom, dad was trying to call you, why aren't you answering your phone?" When she finally heard what I was asking, she replied, "My phone?
Here, it's broken, it wouldn't work so I tried to fix it at Ellen's but it won't work so I have to take it home too and charge it..." I tried to explain to her that she cannot leave the house without making sure her phone works and furthermore, she should not be walking alone.
She didn't hear a word I said.
Instead, she rambled on and on about her walk, how much she was sweating, how the lady from church walked her to her sister's.
On and on she went until I pulled into her driveway.
"I'm glad you're safe mom, please don't scare us again," I said (talking over her, of course).
Mom unlatched her seatbelt and opened her door.
"Oh I need to see if the mail's here too.
It's so good that you saw me, I'm so sweaty I'm gonna go get the mail now and go inside."  And with that, she shut the car door and walked away.
I am glad that mom was safe today.
One thing is clear...we can't rely on mom's ability to navigate anymore.
Sadly, that ability is declining with everything else.
And now some more hard begins, as dad has to figure out how keep mom "under control" while he is gone for the day at work.
:/
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 29, 2013>
I have to admit, I do enjoy a little healthy competition.
Growing up, I got a taste of competition on my high school's swim team.
There is nothing quite like the feeling of winning and succeeding; of beating your own personal best (and I'm not gonna lie, beating the person next you feels pretty good too!)
I was also privileged to be in an amazing high school choir "Madrigals" group.
We were phenomenal (all thanks be to our amazing director...she could make anyone sing well!!)
Our group never left a festival without winning first place and we were well known among our community, performing hundreds of times throughout the year.
There is a sense of pride that comes with success and feeling like a winner.
Additionally, I grew up in a fairly competitive family.
On holidays and family gatherings, my cousins and I would gather together and have massive gaming competitions.
I'm not talking about video games; I'm talking about good-old-fashioned games: card games, word games, board games.
I have to admit, sometimes sparks would fly as one person dominated the game and the others were sore at their loss.
Sometimes names were even called.
I was given a "special" nickname, by my cousin, for my consistent domination in the game Skip-Bo.
But it was all in good fun.
When my first son was about a year old, I began selling Mary Kay.
I loved what the company was all about, loved the products, and loved the competition!
I'm not saying this to brag, but I won many awards for being the top seller or top recruiter in my unit.
If I'm going to do something, I'm going to do it all the way!!
It's that competitive spirit that lives inside of me.
Consequently, when I became pregnant with my last child, I knew I wouldn't be able to keep up with the high goals I had set for myself (I have extremely hard pregnancies) and I decided to put my Mary Kay career on the back burner for a while.
I figured I could always return to it later, when my soon-to-be-baby was a bit older.
As the past few years have gone by, I've had my last baby, welcomed my step-daughter back to our home full-time (which gives me 5 kids to raise...two being teenagers!)
and have had to deal with my mom's diagnosis.
Needless to say, Mary Kay is not a priority right now.
And I'm perfectly okay with that.
My focus right now is on my family.
Last year, I felt this need to do something to help in the fight against dementia.
Maybe it's partly that competitive (or proactive) spirit inside of me.
I just felt a little "stir crazy" sitting around, thinking about this horrid disease that is taking my mom from me, and I decided that I needed to do something about it.
I stumbled onto the Alzheimer's Association's website and found that there are "walks" to raise awareness to dementia as well as raise money to fight against it.
Right away I was on the phone with my Aunt, and together we joined the walk.
Several family members and friends joined with us, and we formed "Team Dee".
Joining the walk awakened that competitive, success-seeking side of me yet again.
What can I say...I enjoy the "high".
I'm a competition-winning junkie!
Ha ha.
It wasn't long before my dad, my Aunt and myself began competing against each other to see who could raise the most money.
Our team quickly rose to the top of the leader board as one of the top earning family teams.
The three of us went on to become part of the exclusive "Champion's Club" for raising more than $500 for the association.
It was an awesome feeling to know that I was competing and doing something for such a good cause.
As soon as The Walk was over, we started planning for the next year.
We set even higher goals for our team and planned to return as the team champions.
I planned to start at the beginning of the year in my fundraising efforts to accomplish this goal.
I had mailed out a few letters at the beginning of the year, but then life threw us all another curveball.
With the demands of raising 5 kids, the physical and emotional hardships of losing my mom, the emotional struggles I've been dealing with in losing my nephew, and my own personal health issues I've recently faced...my head has not quite been in "the game" this year and regretfully, I am not the champion I once was.
I simply haven't had it in me to "bug" people for money and had lost the motivation to even care about fundraising.
I was beginning to come to terms with this and accepting the fact that I simply will not be a champion this year, when my dad suddenly started his fundraising efforts and rose to Champion overnight [he may or may not have inadvertently stolen some of the sponsors I had already asked...but we won't go there ;) ] And now I just can't help myself.
The fire is lit.
I have to be a Champion again.
I can't let them rise to the top without me.
It is not in my nature to lose.
But let's not lose focus in what we're doing this for.
Winning is great; competition is fun and the feeling of being a part of something bigger than myself gives me a great sense of satisfaction.
But more important than the medal (which I can probably go buy at a trophy shop for $5 anyhow), is why I am walking.
I walk to raise awareness, to make a statement, to stand united and fight against the disease that has ripped so much away from me.
I walk to stand up to dementia, to look it in the face and say "You will not break my Spirit!" I walk to raise money for research to find a cure for this disease.
The causing factor of my mom's specific form of dementia was only discovered in 2006.
At this point, there is no medication to even slow down the progression of the disease for her.
Research requires money.
The Alzheimer's Association also gives to those families who are affected by this tragedy.
We have been recipients of some of that money to assist our family.
That gives me even more reason to walk and give back to the Association.
The truth is, we may never find a cure, but at the very least we can give support and help to the families affected.
I am asking for help from anyone who feels compelled to join in this cause to fight against dementia.
Any amount, big or small, brings me closer to my goal and helps the millions affected by this cruel disease.
You can make a donation online by visiting MY WALK PAGE or, if you prefer to mail in a donation, you can print out a form on my page as well (all the information is on the page).
To make this a little fun for everyone donating: I am giving you a little competition as well :) For every $25 you donate, your name will be entered into a raffle.
At the end of The Walk (which is in October) I will choose one person's name (at random, in a drawing) and they will win a $25 gift card to a place of their choice!
And if that's not enough bribery for you, keep in mind that this is also a tax write-off at the end of year.
We all need those deductions, right?
Thank you all for taking the time to read my blog and a big thanks to all of those who help me in my goal.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 20, 2013>
I think mom has been feeling a little confined lately.
Not that there's a whole lot she likes to do outside of the house.
But I think she senses that her independence is slowly being taken away and is determined to keep a hold of it.
Her newest fixation is taking walks; I'm not talking about a leisurely walk.
Her walks have a purpose, a destination.
Her favorite places to walk are: her sister Ellen's house (who lives about a mile to a mile and a half up the street), the bank and the grocery store (both are half a mile up the street).
It's good that mom wants to get out.
She needs to do more than just sit at her computer all day long.
Plus it's good exercise.
But there a few concerns we have with mom leaving the house.
1.
What if something happens to her while she's out and none of us aware of her whereabouts?
2.
She's in her own little world...will she notice the car driving down the road as she crosses (or any other dangers)?
3.
How will people respond to her when they come in contact with her?
Will they think she's on drugs and call the police?
(this might sound silly, but it's happened to many people with dementia).
4.
We have concerns about her withdrawing money from the bank as well as buying things that she's not supposed to be buying (such as medicines).
We know that the time she usually leaves the house is in the morning between 10 and noon.
She rarely emerges from her room before 10:00 am, and she is religious about her lunch and naptimes.
She seldom ever tries to walk after her naptime (before dinner); I'm not sure why, but morning seems to be primetime for getting out of the house.
We've taken measures to ensure mom's safety.
We try to make sure that someone is there each morning.
Each week, I take a morning, my Aunt and Uncle take 2 mornings, and sweet ladies from church have been taking 2 mornings a week.
Mom is growing more and more resentful about having people there in the morning because she wants to do these things alone (likely because she knows she isn't supposed to be doing these things).
Today, she thought she would be sneaky and charge out the door before my Aunt and Uncle knew what was going on.
Luckily, they were on the ball.
He called me shortly after 10:00 to let me know that mom had escaped and that my Aunt ran after her.
I will paste his account here (taken from his facebook update) to give you a more accurate synopsis of the morning's events: "More excitement today--more for my wife than myself.
Shortly after arriving today at my sisters's house she got "happy feet".
She emerged from her bedroom purse over shoulder raring to go walking to the bank and supermarket.
In a flash she was out the door with my wife chasing her.
Although she came with no hat, she knew it would be necessary to have to walk to the store with Deana lest something dreadful happen in spite of the sweltering heat.
Fortunately my wife had a bottle of water with her.
My wife hung onto Deana's arm to keep from being left in the dust.
Deana is tall and Tina is short.
At the bank it was a fiasco.
The teller asked for ID and it was as if she had asked in German.
My wife tipped off the teller and called my niece to let the teller know about what was happening.
The teller was very helpful and said there was "no money" in the account.
(There was.
)Then she was off to the market without any money.
Her goal was to buy some sleeping pills.
A big no-no!
While searching for the brand she uses, she opened the bottles and broke the foil seals to be sure they were her favorite ones.
Startled, my wife told her she couldn't open the product.
Big mistake!
Deana snapped back telling her to stop telling her what to do!!
When she found her pills, it was off to the checkout stand.
Problem was, she did not have the money to pay!
After standing in line at checkout, the line behind her grew and grew.
Frustrated, she spied the small change box on the checkout counter where people make charity donations.
"I can use that money people have thrown away!"
My wife had to convince her she couldn't have it.
Finally she left it all behind and walk out of the store.
I'm betting next time she gets happy feet, she won't let my wife tag along.
I can wait for that!" I'm afraid my mom has worn my dear Aunt out today!
My Uncle also updated me that mom is now giving my Tia Tina the silent treatment (that's mom's way of letting us know she's unhappy with you!)
I'm sure my poor dad will get an earful (from mom) when he gets home as well.
Just another fun day of dementia.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 13, 2013>
Last night, as I was laying in my bed, I began to have a little anxiety about my post yesterday.
I talked with my sister-in-law about it before I wrote it, and she was fine with me writing it.
But I couldn't help feeling like maybe I had over-shared.
Maybe it's because it was something so personal and that had affected me so deeply.
My intention wasn't to write for sympathy.
I write, in part, because it is therapeutic for me.
It helps me to sort out my feelings and to come to terms with certain things.
All of these life experiences, and more importantly the way we respond to them, help to mold us into the people we are today.
My experience with Wyatt was one such experience.
Though it hurts to think about it, I don't ever want to forget him.
I don't want to not talk about him.
Maybe it seems irrelevant to this dementia blog, but it seems as though everything in my life goes back to dementia.
It affects nearly every aspect of my life.
That was partly the message I attempted to convey yesterday.
All that to say, I thought I should share something a little more upbeat today.
Afterall, life is about finding the joy in the journey.
Last Friday was my and my hubby's 10th wedding anniversary.
One thing my mom is still great about is remembering the birthdays and anniversaries of her closest family members.
She talks often about the cards she has collected from the Dollar Tree for so-n-so's upcoming birthday and/or anniversary; she plans months in advance.
She sets each card out days in advance anticipating the day that she is ready to mail them or hand them out.
I dropped by my mom's house on Friday morning.
Mom came out in her pajamas and of course made mention to me about how I had to see her as a Plain Jane.
I immediately tried to redirect her and with a big, cheesy grin on my face, I turned to her and enthusiastically said, "Mom, do you know what special day is today?" She gave me a blank look and slowly shook her a head.
"Mom, think about what day it is today.
Do you remember what is special about today?" She turned around and walked over to her calendar hanging on the wall.
"I don't know, today is Friday?" "Yes, it's Friday, August 9th.
There are two special things about today," I said, cluing her in.
After a few minutes of mumbling and squinting at her calendar, the light bulb finally went on.
"Oh yeah, it's your anniversary and I have something to please let me give to you now please." I followed behind her as she quickly marched into the living room where she had my card sitting on a shelf.
"That's right mom," I said as I followed behind.
"It's 10 years today!
And it's also grandma's birthday; your mom's birthday.
Remember?"  I don't think she heard me once she was on her mission to retrieve the card.
But she was so excited to give me my card and I gave her a hug and thanked her.
As I opened up the card, I couldn't help but to grin.
Inside, in her handwriting, she wrote, "Cassandra & Jeff,  Love you  Good marriage Bud & Deana Cassandra's Dad & Mom" (Just in case we forgot who she was, he he).
It does make me chuckle when I see her cards.
They are so heartfelt and so innocent.
I will hold onto this memory for years to come.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 12, 2013>
A couple of weeks ago, I loaded up my minivan with my 3 youngest kids, and our luggage, and braved a 5 hour drive without my husband to Arizona.
I was a little nervous to make the drive alone, without the assistance of another adult.
But I wanted to spend some time with my sister-in-law and the kids.
They make their way to California often, but most weekends they are here are filled from sunup to sundown with family activities.
We wanted a little time to relax, sew and craft....and just to hang out.
Thank goodness for modern technology (particularly the DVD player in my van).
I couldn't have asked for an easier ride.
The kids were set up with their favorite movies and for nearly 5 hours I was alone with my thoughts.
I can't remember the last time I've had that much time to myself to think.
With the kids contentedly watching movies, headphones on for sound, I had no demands for Disney soundtracks or The Chipmunks.
I had no teenagers taking over the radio with their blaring music.
For once, I was free to listen to what I wanted to and I suppose without so many distractions, my mind was free to think on some things that I had pushed to the back.After going through a couple of different playlists of some favorite pop and rock hits, I was in the mood for something a little more calm and soothing.
Celine Dion was the obvious choice; she has always been one of my favorites.
Something about her music just speaks to my soul.
I hadn't listened to her in quite some time.
As I began my Celine playlist, my mind turned back to my last trip to Arizona.
Oh how life has changed in the last 6 months.
At a time when I thought life was looking pretty sad, I was shown that things could, in fact, get worse.
It was a Wednesday evening in early February.
My husband and I had been planning a trip to Arizona to visit my twin brother, and his family, for that President's Weekend.
Natalie (my sister-in-law) was pregnant with their baby boy, Wyatt, and was getting close to labor.
Natalie and I have a very close relationship; she has become one of my very best friends.
She wanted me to be in the delivery room with her and I was thrilled with the opportunity; I wasn't going to miss it!
That first weekend in February, she had been having a lot of contractions and was beginning to dilate.
By Tuesday evening, I was sure she wasn't going to be able to hold out until I arrived on Friday.
So, with the help of some friends to watch my kids, my dad and I left on Wednesday evening in hopes that we'd make it for the delivery (my husband would meet up with us on Friday with the kids).The drive out there was very enjoyable.
It was really nice to spend the 5 hour drive with my dad, just the two of us.
We talked about a lot of different things.
He told stories and memories of his childhood.
We talked about life, we talked about mom.
I look back on that drive with fondness.Once in Arizona, Natalie's contractions continued but were inconsistent.
We spent the next few days hanging out, shopping, walking...we were anxious for baby Wyatt to make his appearance while we were there.
My dad stayed through Saturday afternoon before he made his trek back home.
My husband and kids arrived on Friday and we spent Saturday visiting a Ghost Town .
While there, my daughter was hugging Aunt Natalie and giggling as Wyatt kicked her from inside.
Later that evening, we relaxed with a movie on their living room couch.
Natalie commented to me that she hadn't felt Wyatt move in a while, which was unusual for her active baby.
I told her drink some juice.
Still no movement.
She went as far as drinking soda and still wasn't feeling any movement.
After about 45 minutes, we decided to go in and get checked-just to be safe.
Joe and Jeff stayed home with the kids while I went with her to Labor & Delivery.I didn't think too much of it.
If anything, I was even a little bit excited because I figured he was just preparing for labor and that was why he wasn't moving around so much.
The odd part, however, was that her contractions had stopped.
As we drove over, I reassured her that everything was probably fine, but it's always better to be safe than sorry and get it all checked out.
Right away, as she checked in, they took her behind the counter to a small area that had a doppler device which was used to check baby's heartbeat.
It was a small space, so they told me I could have a seat in the waiting area.
I sat in the chair across from a family who was overjoyed with excitement at the arrival of their own family baby that was being delivered that evening.
I turned my ears toward the nurse and I heard her moving around the doppler on Natalie's belly in search of Wyatt's heartbeat.
My heart sank.
I've been through 3 pregnancies and am well-versed on the sound of baby's heartbeat.
I was not hearing that sound.
I glanced over to the counter, concern starting to overtake me.
I saw the nurse stand up and walk out and soon after Natalie followed behind her, tears streaming down her face.And then I knew.
"They can't find his heartbeat," Natalie said.We followed the nurse to a bed, where they immediately did an ultrasound.
The nurse looked concerned but didn't say a lot.
She met my eyes with sadness and confirmed what I already knew.
She called the doctor to come down and I left the room to make the hardest phone call of my life.
I had to call my brother.The next 24 hours were the hardest of my life (I'm sure it was nothing compared to the pain Natalie and Joe felt).
I won't go into detail, as it was a very personal experience for all of us.
But I stayed by Natalie's side, along with my brother and her sister (who, thankfully, was already flying in that night in hopes to be there for the  anticipated delivery as well) and she prepared to deliver her baby boy, still.
It was devastating and heartbreaking, to say the very least.
There are no words to describe the emotions and pain we all went through during that time.
At one point (before delivery), I had to leave the room.
While outside the door, I fell down to my knees and began sobbing uncontrollably.
It was hard to catch my breath and I felt like my heart was surely going to rip out of my chest from the utter pain and grief I felt.
I didn't know how I could possibly stay in there through the delivery.
Horrible images flooded my mind.
I remained laying on the floor, crying and trying hard to breathe as the nurses tried to give me comfort.
Suddenly, I felt a hand rubbing my back.
I heard a familiar voice ask me,"Are you okay?" I looked up and peered into my brother's eyes.
In that moment, I knew I needed to hold it together.
For my brother, for my sister-in-law and for my family.
I eventually calmed myself down and returned to the room.
I was able to hold my sweet baby nephew in my arms; to look into his beautiful, perfect face.
I kissed his head and cried about the cruelty of the situation.In the week that followed, Joe and Natalie came out to California, where we arranged for Wyatt to be buried with our grandparents.
With my dad and my dear Aunt Peggy by my side, I dressed Wyatt in preparation for his burial in the clothes that Natalie had selected.
I thought losing my grandma was hard.
And it was.
I also helped to dress my grandma and do her make-up (per her request before she passed) for her burial.
Up until this point, that was the hardest thing I ever had to do.
I suppose that experience helped to give me the strength for what I needed to do for Wyatt (and Natalie & Joe).
But one of the hardest parts of this whole experience was not having my mom by my side.
In fact, it was hard for all of us.
Mom has always been there to help us get through these difficult times in life.
Even with grandma, though her dementia had already begun, mom was able to at least understand what was going on and she was by my side as we prepared grandma.
This time, mom hardly understood what was going on.
She wasn't there to hold our hand or to hug us or give words of comfort.
She wasn't there to cry on or lean on.
It was another painful reminder of another painful loss.As these memories were playing through my mind on that drive, tears began rolling my cheeks.
I dabbed at the tears with a napkin, trying to hold the flood back when Celine Dion's "Good-bye's The Saddest Word" came up on my playlist.
That's when I completely lost it.
Thankfully I had oversized sunglasses covering half my face, so the cars passing by couldn't see the dam that had broken loose on my face.
The song is about a mother who has shown love to her daughter, raising her from a baby into the woman she is today.
It goes on to talk about how it will be the hardest thing in the world to have to someday say good-bye to her mother.
It ends with a promise to her mother that she will be there for her, as that day grows close that her mother can no longer care for herself.I thought about my mom.
I reflected on the love and the comfort she has given me over the years.
Sometimes I feel lost without it, though I am slowly learning how to get by.
Listening to these words was another reminder to me that I need to be there for my mom.
Sometimes I think she would never even know the difference; sometimes she even resents me for "being there".
But the mom I once knew would be grateful for us taking care of her.
"And when you need me I'll be there for you always I'll be there your whole life through I'll be there this I promise you, Mamma"Mamma, I'll be I'll be your beacon through the darkest nights I'll be the wings that guide your broken flight I'll be your shelter through the raging storm And I will love you 'till forever comes." I should've stopped listening to Celine after the Good-bye song.
But what can I say, I'm a glutton.
A few songs later, I had finally gotten myself composed and then this song came on.
I was in tears all over again.
I hadn't heard it in years, but the words seemed so appropriate for what I was thinking and feeling.
I dedicate this song to my beautiful angel, Wyatt.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 24, 2013>
Since mom's diagnosis (in March of 2012), she has been going in for check ups every 6 months or so.
This past Monday was another 6 month check up.
The first few visits were fairly beneficial.
We were educated a lot on the disease.
Last visit (in January), the Dr. was able to recommend medications to help mom with the rigidity and OCD behaviors that come with this disease.
But the more and more we go, the more fight mom gives and the less we feel we are getting out of the visits.
It's not that UCLA isn't doing their job well.
It's just that there is no treatment for the disease.
She is pretty much off the scale that they use for semantic dementia.
She can't identify much of anything from picture anymore.
The one category she can still somewhat identify is the pictures of animals.
She cannot name the animal correctly (she either doesn't recognize it as anything or she classifies every animal as a dog) but she still categorizes most pictures as "animals".
Other pictures shown to her (house, comb, toothbrush, pictures of famous people, etc) elicit a blank stare and no response.
The Dr. reviews with us the symptoms of semantic dementia and reaffirms how mom's behaviors are consistent with the disease.
At this point, we are all too familiar with the symptoms.
We've done our research and taken good notes.
We know what is to come in the future.
Not to sound like "know-it-alls", but there isn't much that they can tell us that we haven't already heard.
They can't give any estimate of how long until mom reaches the next phase.
Every case is individual.
Semantic dementia is known to be one of the longer-running dementias; he said it could last as long as a couple of decades.
With mom's rate of progression, I'm not sure that it will last that long for her.
In fact, I pray it doesn't.
I don't say that in a cold-hearted way; rather, I mean it quite the opposite.
Mom's quality of life is gone.
The only thing she has to look forward to each day is her computer games.
She has no interest any longer in her grandkids or even visiting with her family for Sunday dinner (or any dinner).
Taking care of her is quite stressful.
It is heartbreaking to see her decline more and more and it is heart wrenching as we sit helplessly by and watch the person we once loved so dearly slip further and further away.
Dementia is a cruel disease.
For my own tracking purposes, I would like to note some characteristics of where she's at in this disease, as of July 2013 (to compare with 6 months ago):  Weight: Mom weighed in at 134 lbs.
on UCLA's scale.
This is 6 pounds less than 6 months ago, but about 8 pounds more than a month ago when she was having her eating/gall bladder issues.
Eating: Mom is down to maybe 5 things that she will eat.
She starts the day off with Slim Fast (unbeknownst to her, we have substituted this with Instant Breakfast); she eats a turkey and cheese sandwich everyday for lunch; she will snack on Poppycock, fritos, strawberries or pineapple for her afternoon snack; for dinner she may drink an Ensure or she might make herself some tortellini and mixed vegetables.
Rarely will she eat anything else, but she will still eat hamburgers and burritos as well.
Daily Activities: Mom occasionally, very occasionally, do a load of laundry here or there.
It usually only includes her own laundry (not dad's) and maybe some towels.
I never see her do dishes anymore.
She sits in front of the computer before lunch and after nap to play Spider Solitaire.
Sometimes she will go on walks but only if she has a purpose: a trip to the bank, grocery store or a visit to her sister.
She rarely wants to come to family dinners or family functions and only does come when she is forced.
Personal Hygiene: She is still able to groom herself.
She showers almost everyday.
She puts on her make-up and styles her hair everyday (though it may not look as nice as it once did).
She still dyes her hair every 6 weeks on the dot and she brushes her teeth frequently.
I have noticed that she is not as diligent about washing her hands when necessary.
For example, in the hospital she washed herself with a paper towel in some private areas and wasn't going to wash her hands afterwards (ewe!).
Conversation: It is becoming increasingly difficult to hold a conversation with mom.
She doesn't comprehend most of what we say.
She seems to pick out only key words in conversations that she understands but cannot comprehend the whole of what we are trying to say.
Many times, she gives us blank stares when we talk to her and we receive no response.
She will talk a mile a minute about what she wants to talk about, but she seems to hear nothing we say in response.
Her speech is somewhat slurred together and mumbled, particularly when she can't seem to find the right words to communicate.
Behavior: She has become a little bit more confrontational.
I first noticed this in the hospital and noticed it again the other night, when she was insistent on loading her food in their trailer refrigerator (packing for a trip); she broke one of the shelves on the fridge and when my dad tried to fix it, she kept getting in his way and insisting he put her food in the fridge "now", despite his attempts to redirect him.
At one point, he was physically trying to move her back and she raised her fist at him.
So far she hasn't struck anybody...let's hope it stays that way.
Sleep: She wakes up around 8:00 or 8:30.
Sometimes she will sleep in late, until after 9:00, if she's had a rough night or a rough day before.
She still naps at 1:00 on the dot until 2:30.
She goes to her room by 8:00 to take her medicine and tuck herself into bed.
Dad says she gets up at 10:00 pm every night to go to the bathroom and then goes back to bed.
Sometimes she'll wake up in the middle of the night and trying talking to my dad. 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, July 11, 2013>
My daughter is going through a phase of wanting to give gifts.
At 8 years old, she doesn't have money or transportation to go and buy gifts for people, however.
When she's feeling particularly loving towards someone, she will scavenge in her room until she finds just the right thing to give as her gift.
Among some of the gifts I've received recently are: my grandmother's stuffed animal (which I gave to her when grandma died), plastic necklaces, a homemade necklace of random beads, pictures from coloring book pages, a child's headband, her medal from school...just to name a few.
Each time she gives me her gift, it's wrapped up, haphazardly, in whatever paper she's been able to scrounge up.
Sometimes she will find a gift bag and stick her treasure inside.
She always has a huge smile on her face and watches in anticipation as I open up her heartfelt gift.
Of course I play along and give a show of excitement and thank her for her thoughtfulness.
Since my mom has been stricken with dementia, she has become a child in nearly every way.
Gift giving is no exception.
Last night, we gathered together for a family dinner to celebrate my sister's birthday.
For a few weeks leading up to Christina's special day, mom kept telling her that she wanted to take her to that "bath place" (Bath & Body Works) to buy her some good body stuff.
With all the chaos that has ensued over the past few weeks, mom never made it out with anyone to go shopping.
Last night, as we gathered for Christina's birthday, mom came rushing into the kitchen and put something in Christina's hands: one plastic-sealed bottle of Country Apple Scented body gel and one half-empty bottle of Country Apple Scented body lotion.
"Since I couldn't take you to that bath place here, happy birthday," she said with a big grin.
There was no card; no pretty bows or wrapping paper.
Just a recycled gift that came from mom's heart.
Christina smiled (and chuckled) as she accepted her sweet gift and thanked mom.
Soon after, Christina received a work call on her cell phone.
As she walked down the hall to take the call privately, mom followed behind her, singing into her ear "Happy Birthday to You." I'm growing to appreciate these small, heartfelt moments from my mom.
I see her as I see my children, eager to please and with such an innocence about her.
For me, the gifts I've always appreciated the most are the gifts that come from the heart.
Mom has surely mastered the art!
:)
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 3, 2013>
Some days are good and others are bad.
Yesterday was bad.
Really bad.
After spending four uncomfortable, frustrating days in the hospital, mom was more than ready to go home.
Her surgery had been set for today, but she was ready to go.
She remembered back to her heart surgery, when she came into the hospital the morning of the surgery and she thought this should be the same way.
My dad already had to convince her to stay Monday night.
So we knew she would be a little antsy by the following morning.
Dad had a job to finish up so we lined up family to be there with mom all morning and afternoon until he could return.
My Aunt was scheduled to stay with her until noon and I was to arrive shortly thereafter once I had finished up some errands.
I received a phone call from my Aunt at 11:30 to let me know that she had had enough and was leaving.
"I'm not feeling good and I'm not in the mood for this," she reported.
Apparently, mom was insisting that she was going home and when this Aunt told her she wasn't going to take her, mom told her she could just leave.
So she did.
I was in the middle of dropping my step-daughter off at the airport when I received the call, so it wasn't a situation where I could get over there quickly.
I called my mother-in-law, who was volunteering at the hospital that day, and she went over to check on mom and to ask a nurse to sit with her until I arrived.
I got to the hospital about an hour later and found mom peacefully resting in her bed, eyes closed.
As soon as she heard me, her eyes popped wide open and she sat up, pulling her covers down and revealing her normal clothes on her body.
"Oh good, they said I could go home now too and I can just come back in the morning before the surgery too and I can go home tonight and rest which is so good too because I need to have a shower and do my hair and my make up and other things too..." I looked over at the nurse aid who sat silently by while shaking her head "no".
I told mom that I didn't think she could go home and she protested, "Yes, they told me I could." I called in her nurse who affirmed to me that she was not able to go home.
Mom became irate.
"I can too go home, they told me I could!" We went back and forth for several minutes as I tried to ask her who told her she could go (which she couldn't tell me) and explain to her that she wasn't able to go home.
Of course she understood nothing I said and became very angry with me for "not supporting" her and taking her home.
She began yelling at me, and the nurse, and I shut the door to prevent everyone in the wing from hearing her.
"I want to go home, you can't keep me here!...If you won't take me then I'll go down and pay someone to take me!...you can't tell me what to do!...if nobody is gonna support me then I'll just kill myself!...I wanna go home dammit!
!..." I felt totally lost on how to handle this.
I fought back the tears and all I could think of was to tell her, "Let's just wait here for dad, okay?
You can't leave without dad anyway, so let's just wait.
Will you please sit on the bed?" After much coaxing, mom sat down on the bed.
The nurse told me he had ordered a psych evaluation.
I told him to cancel the test.
That comment set me over the edge...my mom didn't need a psych evaluation, she needed her surgery and to get the heck out of that place!
I was angry at the mere suggestion and was afraid they wanted to lock my mom away, figuring they must have ordered the test because of her "kill myself" comment.
Mom sat down on the bed, her overnight bag on top of her lap, and waited for dad to pick her up and take her home.
I breathed a sigh of relief that for the moment; she had settled down.
I texted my dad to let him know the situation and as soon as I glanced back up, I noticed that mom had silently pulled out her IV.
"Mom, you can't take that out," I said, but I was too late.
"Yes I have to take this out.
I'm going home.
Your dad is going to take me home and I hope he'll take me to a really good dinner too." And so my very long afternoon continued.
Every once in a while, mom would stand up and start insisting I take her home.
I tried and tried to convince her to sit down and wait for dad but as the day wore on, the waiting became more difficult.
They moved her to another room, which was closer to the nurses station and in a quieter location (and much farther away from her room that sat right next to the elevator).
It was a chore to get her to move.
I had to convince her that it was much quieter down there (she continually complains about how noisy it is there) and I told her that they were bringing someone else in the room; it would be much better to go wait in a room by herself without a roommate.
It worked and she finally followed to the next room.
As the hours wore on, mom became more and more restless.
When she realized she couldn't convince me to take her home, she tried manipulation.
"They told me I could exercise so I need to go for a walk too." "If you're going for a walk, you need to leave your overnight bag here," I replied, knowing full well of her intentions to escape downstairs.
By 3:00, I had to physically get up and stand at the door to prevent her from leaving.
By this point, a social worker had arrived and I vented all of my frustrations of the hospital and our situation with her.
She was very compassionate and helped me in whatever way was possible, but of course the surgery was completely dependent on the doctor and his schedule.
The social worker stood at the door with me as mom tried to move me aside and shouted, "I'm the mom, you're the daughter, you can't tell me what to do!
!" It took every ounce of self control to hold back my tears and not have a break down right there in her hospital room.
I asked the social worker if there was some medication to calm her down.
"That's what the psych evaluation is for," she answered.
Why the heck didn't the nurse tell me that??
Here I was thinking they wanted to evaluate her and lock her away when the test was simply for evaluating if she needed something to calm her down.
She apologized for the miscommunication (or lack of) and reassured me that the test was in no way designed to send her away to a mental hospital; we decided to ask for the doctor to come evaluate her.
My other Aunt (mom's other sister) showed up and tried to help me calm mom down.
I was so thankful to have some extra help; it was very difficult to manage on my own.
By late afternoon I had both the social worker and my Aunt to help keep me sane.
My dad finally arrived to the hospital around 5:00 and I was never so thankful to see him!!
I knew (and warned him) that all hell would break loose once again as soon as he got there.
And it did.
Mom was angry that dad wouldn't take her home.
"No, I can go, they told me I could go!
I need to go home and shower and use my really good soap stuff and wash my hair real good and do my hair too and my make-up and other things too.
And I need my clean clothes too, these are too dirty." "Dear, look.
I brought all your good stuff, see?"  Dad took out her favorite body washes and laid out each piece of make-up and article of clothing to show that he hadn't missed a thing.
She refused.
She held on tight to her bag (it had been on her lap or on her shoulder the entire time I was there).
The tantrum went on.
She paced the room, she tried to push through my dad, she tried manipulating and bribing my dad to take her home, she yelled, she cursed, she flipped my dad off several times.
Through it all, my dad remained calm, patient and even tried to make light of the situation and tried to joke around with her a bit.
He reassured her that he would stay with her the entire night.
He did a great job and after another hour or so of her tantrums, she finally sat on the bed.
I think dad might have finally found his leverage with her-he started talking about the trip she wants to take to Utah this summer and he told her that she had to get better and have the surgery if she wanted to go (of course it took a lot of repeating and explaining over and over before she caught on...he was talking about all the people they would visit and the places they would go).
At this point, her sedative finally arrived (nearly 2 hours after I asked for it).
They gave her a shot in her shoulder; she whined about them hurting her and then sat silent for several minutes.
And then, out nowhere, she sat up and began fumbling through her things.
"What are you looking for dear?" dad asked.
She ignored him.
She ignored my Aunt.
She ignored me.
She collected her clean clothes and her body wash and marched over the bathroom.
"There's no shower in there," I reminded her, as she silently closed the door and locked it behind her.
We listened to her behind the closed door as she scrubbed herself with wet paper towels for the next 5 minutes.
Then, she came out in her pajamas and plopped down on her hospital bed.
She put her legs up and got out her favorite smelling bubble bath...and began applying it as lotion.
"Mom-that's not lotion.
See here?
It says bubble bath," I told her.
She ignored me and continued rubbing in her bubble bath.
I chuckled and let her go about her business.
What could it hurt?
When she was finished, she looked up and said, "Do you think I should put on my make-up now or in the morning?" For the first time in the 7 hours I had been there, I was able to sit back and relax.
It appeared that mom had accepted her fate of staying in the hospital for one more night.
I'm wondering how it's going to blow over after her surgery today if they tell her she has to stay just one more night. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 2, 2013>
I'm writing this fast, as I'm short on time, but I wanted to give an update on my mom.
This is an extremely condensed version.
Please forgive me that my writing is not at it's best ;) Last Thursday, I left with my hubby and kids to meet up with my twin brother (and his family) at Lake Mead for a long weekend of fun.
I felt nervous about leaving mom because she still wasn't eating.
By Thursday night, she was throwing everything up again.
I talked to my dad Friday morning and he said he was taking her into Urgent Care, again.
After spending all day in Urgent Care and undergoing some tests, they found that a number with her liver was way too high (sorry, I don't know all of the medical terminology-I wasn't there).
They then did an ultrasound and found a blockage in her bile duct which meant she had a gallstone.
This blockage is the reason why she cannot hold anything down and why she has been throwing everything up.
They admitted her to the hospital (Friday night) and said they'd do more tests on Saturday to get a more clear picture and determine their next step, which would be either removing the gallstone or removing the gall bladder (this is what they told my dad).
Saturday came and they took her out in the afternoon to do a few tests.
Upon returning her to her room, they gave my dad no further information.
When he finally asked, they told him that the attending doctor would be by that evening to speak with him.
Dad waited until 9:30 pm and no doctor ever came by.
He also ordered mom some soup from the cafeteria around 7:00 pm and it never arrived.
Dad went home feeling frustrated and not really sure what was going on.
When he arrived back at the hospital early Sunday morning, he was told the doctor had already made her rounds.
He asked if the doctor would call him and he was told she would.
He also gave mom an Ensure, as she had been asking for something and nothing had ever arrived from the cafeteria.
The nurses gave my dad no instructions on what she could or could not eat (the communication with this hospital has been lacking, to say the least), so he figured he'd make her happy and give her the drink and if the nurses had a problem with that then maybe it would be a lesson of communication for them.
My dad waited...and waited...and waited for the doctor to call.
My mother-in-law, who is the President of Volunteer Board at the hospital, got wind (from me) about what was going on and she put in a heated phone call to the charge nurse.
The nurse told her that the doctor was on the phone with my dad "as we speak", which turned out to be a lie.
However, the doctor finally did call a couple hours later for the first time throughout mom's stay-after the doctor who would be removing the gall stone came in and explained the whole procedure to my dad.
She (the attending doctor) was a day late and a dollar short.
They sent mom in for an MRI Sunday afternoon and the doctor who was removing the gall stone told dad that the procedure would take place likely sometime on Monday and that it was up to the surgeon to decide, after looking at the MRI, if she would need her gall bladder removed.
Yesterday, as we were driving home from the lake, mom went in to have the gall stone removed.
They never gave a time or anything for when it would be done; it was just a spur-of-the-moment "okay we're going to take her in now." My sister (who was with mom) called my dad, who was finishing up on a job, to come and he rushed over, only to wait a couple more hours for them to finally take her in.
By the time I arrived at the hospital (around 4 pm) she was back in her room and confused at whether or not they had taken her out to do surgery.
Try as we might to explain it to her, mom could not understand what had gone on.
Furthermore, they hadn't said a word to dad when they dropped her off about what was going on.
We finally called a nurse in, who was under the impression that mom would be going home now that the stone was removed.
My dad told her that the operating doctor had said the surgeon was supposed to look at the MRI (taken the day before) to determine if the gall bladder needed to come out.
The nurse went to make a phone call for clarification to both the doctor and the surgeon and confirmed that the surgeon would "definitely" be by that evening to check on mom and make a decision on her gall bladder.
She also put a call in to the attending doctor so she could fill dad in on the details (I think there was a little confusion about that...we were hoping to speak to the surgeon himself to know if he would, in fact, be coming to the hospital).
The attending doctor eventually called dad and made it very clear to him that she did not have time to come by and check on mom.
I don't know what the point of her phone call was; she gave no useful information and she has been absolutely useless throughout mom's stay (not to mention she has had a very witchy attitude with dad).
They are paying her for nothing.
We waited...and waited...and waited for the surgeon to come by and let us know what the heck was going on.
If mom did not need the surgery, she would be free to go home.
Mom was getting very restless and couldn't understand why they were making her stay.
"I don't think these people here are being very supportive of me and helping me.
I want to go home please...your sister was here earlier and wasn't being so supportive of taking me home so please your dad and you can take me home now, please, I want to go." Over and over mom asked what time we were leaving and demanding that we take her home.
My sister had also reported to me (earlier that morning) that mom had already taken her IV out 3 times over the past 2 days; the poor dear is tired and restless and wants to be home in her comfort zone.
The nurse put in a call to the surgeon that we were waiting to talk to him and again reassured us that he would be by.
By 9:00 pm the surgeon still hadn't come and I headed home.
I felt bad for leaving when she was so hopeful that I would be the one to save her and rescue her from the hospital.
I called my dad this morning and he related to me that the surgeon finally called him THIS MORNING to affirm that he would indeed be removing her gall bladder.
He claims that he had no knowledge that our family was waiting to speak to him and also claimed to have an emergency today; therefore, he cannot perform the operation today but rather, mom has to stay ANOTHER night and wait until tomorrow to have her gall bladder removed.
My Aunt is with my mom now and has been texting me that she is very upset this morning.
I will be heading over shortly and maybe I can distract her.
Although I am not hopeful.
It was a bit nerve racking being away while all of this was going on.
Not that I could have done anything to help her...but just being away while she was going through all of this was hard.
I had fun with my family, but mom was constantly on my mind and I was constantly nagging my dad and sister for updates.
My sister and my dad did a great job taking care of her, making sure someone was always with her, and my sister has done an excellent job keeping my family and me informed of everything going on.
I know she was in good hands.
But I can't help feeling guilty being away.
We have another weekend trip planned for the holiday to visit my twin in Arizona and pick up a couple of my kids (who went home with him).
And again, I question myself for leaving.
I know there are others who can step in; I am not, by any means, irreplaceable.
But I just feel guilty being away when she's going through this.
Thank goodness for family and for friends and for the good people at church who fill in and help take care of my mom.
Hopefully, once her gall bladder is out, and she begins her healing process, this will resolve most of her stomach issues and we can get her eating again!!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 26, 2013>
I wasn't ready for this stage quite yet.
I've tried to prepare myself for our future with dementia by educating myself on the disease.
I have read books.
I have gone to support groups.
I network with others online.
I think, for most part, I know what to expect.
Yet I did not expect to have this issue at this phase in the game.
I thought this part wouldn't come until the end.
That's usually when a person refuses to eat.
Or, at least, that's what I thought.
I know that mom could pass through many phases in this diseases.
I've read about others who regress back to toddlerhood and infancy, putting non-food objects in their mouth, getting into things they shouldn't be touching.
I know many caregivers have to "childproof" their living spaces to keep their loved one safe.
Most, if not all, lose the ability to toilet themselves, shower themselves or take care of any hygiene for that matter.
Towards the end phases, many have trouble walking, talking (some lose language completely), and many develop problems swallowing and lose the ability to eat.
Mom hasn't passed through any of these phases yet.
She still takes care of her own hygiene.
She toilets and showers herself.
She puts on a face of make-up and attempts to curl her hair everyday (though not quite like she used to).
Aside from hiding car keys, medicines and credit cards, we haven't had to childproof anything from mom.
I thought she would have to pass through all of these phases before she struggled with the eating phase.
I expected it.
I guess it's true what they say.
No two cases of dementia are exactly alike.
Over the past couple of months, mom has altered her diet once again.
One thing always remains the same, and that is her morning Slim Fast.
[Although one minor modification to that is that sometimes she will skip it in the morning now and drink it for lunch instead].
A typical day consists of: Slim Fast in the morning, a sandwich for lunch (with turkey, tomato, sliced American cheese, mayo and lots of sandwich oil), occasionally fruit (strawberries or canned pineapple) or Poppycock for an afternoon snack, and an Ensure for dinner.
If we are lucky, she might go out to dinner with us but that has almost become non-existent as well.
We can't even get her to go out to her favorite restaurant (Miguel's) anymore!
In the past week, the only solid food mom has eaten is some strawberries (twice) and 1 1/2 or 2 sandwiches; this is total for the entire week.
She might have tried to eat a handful of Poppycock popcorn once or twice.
Half of that food was thrown up.
She drinks her Slim Fast everyday, once a day, and drinks a small can of Ensure most nights for dinner.
Half of that has been thrown up as well.
She only drinks water (about 6-8 oz) when she takes her medication, 3 times a day (as far as I've noticed).
Try as we might, we cannot get her to eat anything.
We've tried soups, Gatorade, popsicles, lemon-ginger tea, breads, toast...we've even offered to take her shopping to pick out what she thought would sit well in her stomach.
It's no use.
Mom has it in her head that if she eats, she will throw up.
And when mom has something in her head, you cannot convince her otherwise.
My dad took her to a follow-up appointment with the doctor yesterday...if that did any good.
All they did was order more lab work and give her more medicine: one medication to prevent her from throwing up, and one medication to help increase her appetite.
My dad is willing to do anything at this point to get her to eat, including to try this medication.
I suppose it is worth a shot, but I'm a bit more hesitant-with good reason.
With mom's disease, the body loses it's ability to make sense of bodily functions and signals.
For example, mom cannot understand why her eyes water all the time; she thinks she's "so weird" when she burps or yawns or if her stomach makes noises.
She doesn't understand these things anymore or what these functions represent.
Along with this, they (those with semantic dementia) lose the sense of knowing when they are hungry or full.
I firmly believe that mom's ability to decode hunger is lost.
I think a part of her stomach pains could actually be attributed to hunger pain.
But she doesn't recognize it as such.
Instead of eating and ending the hunger pains, she skips meals because she's afraid of upsetting her stomach.
If my hypothesis is correct, wouldn't it be logical, then, to say that this medication will only worsen her stomach problems?
Mom now weighs in at 126 pounds.
That means she has lost another 14 pounds in the past 5 months and I would say most of that has been in the past 2 months.
If this drastic change in her eating continues, at what point will the doctors do more than just prescribe a pill?
I'm not sure what this means for the future.
Is it just a phase?
Will she eventually start to eat again?
Or has she taken a drastic turn? 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 24, 2013>
In my last post, I talked about mom's ongoing stomach issue.
By this weekend, mom was still throwing up.
She was unable to hold anything down.
I'm not a doctor, but I know enough to figure out that mom was dehydrated by this point.
I told dad that she needed to see a doctor.
I think he was afraid he'd take her down there and they'd just send him home (since no stomach issues have been found at previous visits) but I explained to him that she is most likely dehydrated, having not held anything down for a few days.
By yesterday afternoon, dad was ready to take her in.
But mom, much to our surprise (she normally loves the doctor), was very resistant.
Dad fought with her for a good 20 minutes or so, to no avail.
"No there's no doctors open on Sunday.
I want to lay here, no.
I'm not going." I talked to my very-frustrated-dad on the phone and told him I'd be right over to see if I could convince mom to go.
My back up plan was to my call my Aunt Sharon, who is a nurse, and put her on the phone with mom to tell her she had to go.
Fortunately, it didn't get to that point.
By the time I pulled up to dad's house, mom was sitting on the couch ready to go.
"I don't know what kind of hold you have over her, but as soon as I said Cassandra was coming over she jumped out of bed and was ready to go...20 minutes of fighting and that's all it took," dad explained to me, as I walked in the room.
[I have to confess, that made me feel a little bit good inside...like the kind of good when you walk into a room and a baby reaches for you and wants you to be the one to hold them].
"Mom, we're taking you to Urgent Care," I explained to her.
"What?
I didn't know the doctor was open on Sundays?
I didn't know that, but is it the Riverside Medical Clinic?
Is it there?
I don't want to go to a new place." "Yes, it's the same place mom.
You've been to Urgent Care lots of time; you'll remember once you're there." We led her to the car and drove her to Urgent Care.
Dad even took her "favorite" route to make her happy.
We pulled into the Urgent Care side of the clinic and mom got out of the car, looked at the sign and said, "Oh, Urgent Care.
Yeah, I know Urgent Care.
I didn't hear you say that it was Urgent Care." Really??
When we walked into the waiting room, there was only one elderly couple (probably late 70's) sitting in the room.
Dad checked mom in at the front desk as mom plopped down in a chair across from the couple.
She turned her body towards them and immediately started chatting incessantly to the elderly woman.
"I'm feeling so severe, my stomach too and I've been throwing up, I hope the doctors can help me." Mom began rambling on for several minutes as the woman stared blankly at mom.
"It's just so weird how us women change when we get to be in our 50's, are you in your 50's too?"  "No," the woman replied flatly.
"Oh, no?
Are you younger than me then?" "Older," she stated.
The woman was saved then, as the nurse called her back to a room.
A few minutes later mom was called by the nurse to read her vitals.
The nurse asked her to step on the scale; mom refused.
"No I just went on my scale at home a few days ago too and it said 133 pounds, which is so good too." After finally convincing mom that she had to step on the scale, she protested when it read 126 pounds.
"No, I don't weigh like that, I weigh 133 pounds.
No."  After her vitals were read, they asked for a urine sample.
Dad gave me the honor of helping her with that.
I'll spare you the details.
Suffice it to say, she was very confused at why she had to do this and insisted she went pee at home and didn't need to do it.
We were (barely) able to get what we needed.
Shortly after settling into her room, the doctor came in and asked a few questions.
Mom went a-mile-a-minute telling him not only about her stomach problems, but about every other problem as well.
He was very patient and listened to mom as she went on.
We, of course, explained her situation (and her dementia) and he told us that her urine sample came back showing that she was "severely" dehydrated (his words, not moms!!)
He explained that she was spilling out ketones; in normal urine, it should test negative for ketones.
Mom's tested at the highest level possible.
When urine spills ketones, it means dehydration and a lack of proper fats and nutrients to the body.
She also had a slight urinary tract infection.
He told us that he'd start an IV to hydrate her as well as give a round of antibiotics to treat the UTI.
He tried explaining this to mom as well.
Of course she had no idea what an IV was and was expecting a magic pill to cure her ills.
As the nurse came in to set up mom's IV, I became a bit nervous.
My teeth chatter when I get really nervous and try as I might, I couldn't stop the chattering.
I felt like I was back in there with my small child, anticipating the surprise and pain they would feel at the poke of the needle.
I wasn't sure how she would react and I was praying she wouldn't throw a big fit.
A 2 year old is easy enough to hold down...a 52 year old...not so much.
We explained as we went along, trying to capture mom's attention.
She rambled on and on about the trip she wants to take to Utah because "it's so good there" and she has family members she'd like to see.
A good distraction I suppose, but I didn't want her to be caught off guard and freak out.
I followed her eyes, made contact, and said, "Mom, she's going to put a needle in your arm, like a shot.
It's going to hurt just a little bit, okay?
Just hold still." The nurse did the same (explaining) but I'm not sure that mom really understood.
When the needle went in, mom flinched.
"Owe!
That hurt!
Why did you do that?
Why are you doing that to me?
Owe!
Don't do that, owe, that hurts!" Unfortunately, the first attempt to start the IV didn't work, and she had to try again on another vein, with the same protests.
As soon as the pain subsided, however, mom went right back into her conversation about Utah without skipping a beat.
Despite her protests, mom did really well and held still while the nurse did what she needed to do.
Thank goodness!!
Then came the hard part.
Waiting.
And waiting.
Mom kept asking when we could leave, complaining that she was uncomfortable and cold.
She ended up with 5 blankets and her fleece jacket on top of her, but she was still cold.
We tried to make her comfortable and pointed to the fluid bag, explaining that all of that "medicine" had to drip down through her IV and into her body before we could leave.
I lost track of how many times we explained that to her.
"Where's the doctor?
Why do they keep leaving?
I wanna go home now!
I need to go home.
They need to let me go home." When the nurses would come in to check on the bags, mom would start on them, "Can you take this off now please, I wanna go home?
I don't know why I still have to be here." As the fluid was finishing up, the doctor made his way back in to check on mom.
"Oh, can you please let me go now?
And take this thing off so we can leave?
I'm ready to go home.
And I'm so cold too." "I can get you another blanket," the doctor said, exiting the room briefly to round up another blanket.
Mom became agitated.
"Where did he go now?
Why does he keep leaving?
?"  She kicked her foot off the edge of her bed and kicked at the curtain in an attempt to look out the door for the doctor.
Just then, he stepped back in and mom let out a sheepish grin.
"Oh, there you are.
Please take this off and let me go home now." "Okay, we're almost done and you can go home." They could see she was getting restless, so as the last drops of the fluid made their way down into her IV, they began their check out process in an effort to pacify mom.
They checked her vitals, printed out the at-home care instructions and input some notes in their computer...as slowly as they could.
Mom was overjoyed when it came time to take out the needle (though she was not very amused that they wrapped her arm again where the puncture was...the dressing over the IV had been irritating her all night!)
Nearly 3 hours later after our adventure had begun, mom was back at home.
I'll be heading over there shortly, and hopefully she is up and doing much better today.
This brings the future to question...how many more times will we end up in Urgent Care or the ER, hooked up to an IV?
Will this become a weekly or bi-monthly procedure?
No amount of explanation can convince mom that she needs to eat or drink.
Once she starts feeling the slightest bit nauseous, which can be for a number of reasons, she quits eating and drinking and the viscous cycle begins.
I plan on buying some ketostix over the counter at the pharmacy, which will help in monitoring the dehydration.
We need to look into more medical options and see about a home nurse coming in weekly to check on her.
I'm not sure how to begin that process, but it's on the to-do list.
I suppose this is just one of the many issues we are going to have to deal with from here on out in this ugly journey of dementia.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, June 21, 2013>
Mom has been having stomach issues for quite some time now.
She will go days, and even weeks, with little problem and then suddenly a stomach "attack" comes on.
Lately, these episodes are becoming closer together.
An episode usually starts in the evening or in the middle of the night.
Usually.
Mom starts to feel "severe" and in no time she is hovering over her small wastebasket at her bedside, gagging and throwing up phlegm and liquid.
By the next day, she refuses to eat because she is afraid that if she does, it will upset her stomach and she will throw up again.
So it continues for a few days: mom, throwing up while taking her usual medicines and refusing to eat.
I believe it's a cycle.
Mom's stomach is upset.
Mom throws up.
Mom refuses to eat which makes her stomach even more upset causing her to become nauseous and eventually throw up again.
The part that is unclear is why she is getting sick in the first place.
We've brainstormed many ideas: maybe she's developed a lactose intolerance (we switched her milk to almond milk, unbeknownst to her) or maybe she's eating spoiled food (this could still be a possibility, but we try our hardest to keep up on cleaning out the fridge).
We have taken her to a specialist (the "stomach doctor") who has done ultrasounds and CT scans.
Nothing shows up.
Yesterday, dad had another appointment with this doctor to follow up with past issues and again, he said that there was nothing obvious that was showing up that could be a source for her sickness.
He recommended that they put mom under anesthesia and do some sort of exploratory procedure to see if anything else can be seen.
Dad told him that he would consider it, but hasn't made a decision on whether or not to put mom through this.
There are pros and cons to the procedure.
The pro would be that we could possibly find a cause for her stomach issues.
The cons are many: how will mom do under anesthesia?
Could it cause further complications with mom's condition or could it "push along" the disease process?
If they do find something-say, maybe cancer-what good would that knowledge do [I know this sounds horrible, but if indeed they did find cancer would it be worth putting mom through chemo in her condition and with the quality of life that she has to look forward to?]
These are all things to consider.
The biggest question remains: if we put her through this test, are they actually going to find something or is a lot of this in mom's head?
With semantic dementia, hypochondria is a big problem.
This was explained to me at our last visit with UCLA, that with this form of dementia, their mind is losing memory/recognition of what certain bodily functions mean.
For example, mom's stomach may growl or hurt because she is hungry, yet she doesn't understand that what she is feeling is related to hunger; she becomes confused with what she is feeling.
Because of this lack of recognition, they become preoccupied with and fixated on every sensation they feel.
Could it be that mom is simply hungry but cannot recognize the hunger pain?
Rather than eating and putting an end to the hunger pains, mom starves herself for days, only occasionally drinking Slim Fast, Ensure or water, all the while continuing to take her medications.
It becomes a cycle: not eating, feeling sick, not eating because she feels sick, feeling more sick because she's not eating.
Within the past 2-3 months, mom's eating habits have significantly worsened.
She hardly eats (which could explain her increase in stomach problems).
She's losing more weight.
She drinks Slim Fast for breakfast, Ensure most nights for dinner and eats only a sandwich at lunch time.
Sometimes she will snack on fruit or Poppycock in the afternoon.
I know that when I do not get enough to eat, I sure don't feel good!
Despite our efforts in getting her eat, she keeps herself on a mostly liquid diet.
She doesn't recognize most foods anymore (the other day she didn't even know what chicken tacos were...and that was one of her 'staple' foods only a few months ago!)
and when we try to convince her to eat something we've made, she protests, "No, different things now upset my stomach, no.
I don't know how that will make my stomach feel." I have tried telling her over and over and OVER that her stomach upset is likely due to her medication with her liquid diet.
She will hear nothing about it.
No amount of coaxing or explaining will convince her.
We have tried everything we can think of.
We are at a loss of what to do.
:(
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 19, 2013>
For the past 2 years, mom has wanted Disneyland tickets for her birthday.
Last year, my siblings and I bought both her and dad tickets to go.
She went and had a good time, but was tired by late afternoon/early evening.
But from what I remember, she went on quite a few rides and reminisced about her earlier days at the popular amusement park.
This year, as her birthday approached, mom kept no mystery as to what she wanted for her gift.
"And last year how you got me those tickets to go to Disneyland, I want to have those again so will you buy them for me too please?" (When she asks questions such as these, they generally sound more like demands than questions, ha ha).
Of course I wanted to make all of her dreams come true.
But the reality is, my dad is the one who would have to take her.
I wanted to make sure he was up to it.
The nice guy that he is, he said that he had already been considering taking her.
Mom's birthday was in May, and I told her I was sending her to Disneyland for her birthday gift.
Every time I've seen her since, she asks me where her ticket is and laments, "I just don't know why your dad won't take me yet." [Side note: dad has been really busy running his business].
This week, dad was in between jobs and decided he'd take mom to Disneyland.
When I asked him how it went, he told me he would write down his story and email to me (and my siblings).
I asked him if I could share this on my blog.
He was hesitant at first, but I was able to talk him into it ;) I think it's good for my readers to sometimes see things in the perspective of other members of my family, especially my dad.
Some parts are a little sad and some parts will make you laugh out loud.
So here it is; thank you, dad, for opening up and letting me share this.
"Mom got a ticket for California Adventure from Cassandra last month for her birthday.
For the last month she's been like a child "when can we go", "It'll be good exercise for me too" "being active I won't even need to take a nap".
Finally the day came when I could take her.
I got up at my usual time, took care of some things, then woke her at 730.
We had issues about taking the purse vs. taking the buttpack, as she would normally do.
She wanted to take everything, finally consolidating to the buttpack; I gave in on taking the three full pill bottles.
We left at 8:45, I got a little turned around in Anahiem, mom kept trying to be the navigator, "you're not going the correct way".......Blah, blah blah.
We arrived at the Woody parking lot, very unfamiliar territory for her.
She was very insistent that I wasn't at the right place.
We took the shuttle, got to the gate by 10.
She wasn't too keen on opening the pack and letting security have a look, but we finally got into California Adventure and started walking around.
"This isn't looking correctly to me, No, No this isn't the right state, this isn't right."
We walked around finally got on the white water raft ride.
She got wet, protesting loudly how unhappy it made her.
We walked around for about an hour.
She couldn't find the "severe rides" she remembered.
She wanted to be at Disneyland, So I go to customer services, explain the situation, 15 minutes later we're in Disneyland.
We went on Pirates of the Caribbean, Haunted House and walked around looking for the "severe ride" which I think she was thinking Big Thunder Mountain, which was closed and fenced off so it was mostly out of view.
Lunch time, medicine, walking around more, nothing seemed to interest her, not shopping, not any of the rides.
We went to see about space mountain,(not that she would've gone on it) but even fast pass was three hours out.
She seemed to enjoy Michael Jackson at Captain EO.
Nothing else interested her so by 3:00 we were heading out.
While at California Adventure, nature called, so I hunted down the nearest restroom, told mom "wait right here" so I go in standing at the urinal checking out the tile work when I hear "So this is the men's bathroom too?"
Horrified I turned to find none other than mom standing there wringing her hands together as she does.
It's amazing how many thoughts shot through my head at once.....well at least they have partitions....I quickly looked to see how many of the dozen or so people noticed a woman in there....I wanted to be mad, but simply told her "you can't be in here go wait outside please.....I remembered Rod Steward's line from Every Picture Tells a Story "make the best time out of bad , just laugh it off" So I did.
Looking back, it was quite humorous.
She has such an innocence about her.
I feel bad for her that she wasn't fully able to enjoy her long anticipated trip, but I don't know how much she realizes the difference, between what is and what used to be.
She seemed content to have spent such a short time there."
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, June 9, 2013>
This summer marks 10 years that my hubby and I said our "I Do's".
Every year, we take a weekend away somewhere-just the two of us-to celebrate our years together.
Hitting the 10 year milestone this year, we felt it was only appropriate to do something big.
For the past year, we've been brainstorming places to venture away.
We both love the water and the sunshine and decided on a popular tourist destination that we haven't yet been to: Cancun, Mexico.
For months we planned this trip.
We researched the best sites to see and places to visit during our stay.
We greatly anticipated our getaway and I prepared by shopping for swimsuits and daydreaming about the long hours I'd spend laying out on the beach, soaking up the sun with a good book in hand.
For an entire week I would cast away my worries and the stress of everything else going on in my life and just enjoy being carefree and having uninterrupted time with my husband.
This vacation was all about us;  it was about sun, fun and relaxation.
And boy was I looking forward to it!
Late Friday night (a week ago) I kissed my kids good-bye and hopped on a plane with my other half to begin our week of Paradise.
We arrived in Cancun Saturday afternoon...along with Andrea-a tropical storm.
We didn't realize, at first, that a tropical storm was following us in.
We've vacationed in the tropics before and have had storms come in, stay for a couple hours, and then head out.
I figured this rain would be the same.
So I wasn't terribly concerned when we ventured out on a shuttle to the Sister Resort of where we were staying.
While we were there, the rains came down harder and harder, so much that when we were ready to go back to our hotel, the shuttle driver refused to drive on the roads and told us we'd have to wait a couple hours or walk.
We attempted to walk.
Oh how foolish we were.
The roads were so flooded that we ended up taking off our shoes and wading in calf-deep water to find the public bus stop.
We hopped on the bus and were SOAKED by the time we made it back to our hotel.
We got a good laugh out of it.
After all, the storm was sure to be over and in the morning I'd be laying on the beach sipping my (virgin) strawberry daiquiri and soaking up the sun.
Well, the morning came.
But the sun did not.
In fact, for the next 4 days it rained.
It rained and it poured as Tropical Storm Andrea unleashed her fury on Cancun.
At first, I decided that the rain was not going to hold me back from having fun.
We booked our trip to see the Mayan Ruins of Tulum, followed by snorkeling at Xel Ha.
But I have to admit, the rain really put a damper on everything.
It was hard to relax and have fun with rain pounding down and blowing into my eyes.
The wind, along with the rain, made it too cold to fully enjoy the experience in the water.
There was supposed to be sunshine.
I was supposed to be getting a suntan and taking naps in the hammocks.
This was NOT how I envisioned my trip to be.
Still, we tried to have fun.
We had to modify our original plans and we did have some fun.
There were moments that the rain stopped and we were able to swim in the pool (under the gray clouds) or shop at the flea market.
We took advantage of the hotel's spa and got a couple's massage and joined in the night life activities at the resort (all of which was indoors).
But we also had many moments of despair as our plans were constantly changing and put on hold due to inclement weather.
By Wednesday morning, the rain was so bad that I was sure a hurricane was coming.
For the 2nd day in a row, our horseback riding trip had been cancelled as had most other trips because the storm was too debilitating to drive through.
I laid in bed all morning, covers over my head as I cried about my ruined plans (and lack of sunshine!!!)
We even debated throwing in the towel and coming home early.
What was the point of staying through the storm?
That night was karaoke night in the hotel lounge.
We walked down (through the rain) and met up with some other friends we had met the previous day at the pool.
They asked if we had still planned on attempting the day trip we wanted to take to XPlor the following day.
"We just don't see the sense in paying all that money to go just to be rained on," Jeff explained.
"Yeah...we figured it was either be rained on at the hotel, or be rained on while doing something fun," our new friend answered back.
I contemplated what she said.
I looked outside to see that the rains had stopped and the trees were still.
My brother, also known as "Weatherman Joe" (due to his obsession with tracking tropical storms), told me that by Thursday the storm should be making it's way up to Florida.
I wasn't holding my breath, but I also knew that I couldn't handle another depressing day in the hotel.
And I was tired of cancelling trips!!
Jeff and I briefly discussed the day trip and decided we'd take the chance and book XPlor for the next day.
We had determined, by this point, that no hurricane was coming and the worst case scenario would be that we got rained on.
Half of the day trip was swimming and rafting in caves anyway, so rain wouldn't really make a difference.
I decided that no matter the outcome, I was going to have a good attitude and make it a great day!
Thursday morning, for the first time since we had arrived (and our last full day in Cancun), we woke up to blue skies and the sun shining overhead.
That put a huge smile on my face!
We met our shuttle and journeyed to XPlor where we spent the day in sunshine with not a drop of rain!
We ziplined, swam in caves, went on rafts through caves with stalactites and stalagmites and took a turn driving an all-terrain vehicle through caves and over bridges and mud.
It was awesome.
Had it rained, we still would have enjoyed the day because I told myself that were gonna have fun!!
The sun was an added bonus!
I've thought about this vacation as a metaphor for my life.
10 years ago, I was on top of the world.
I was madly in love, getting married and starting my new life.
I had a perfect vision of what my life would be like.
I had everything mapped out; I anticipated what was to come and daydreamed about what life would be like in the future.
I never saw the storm coming.
I never anticipated the heartbreaks that would come my way, the things I have had to go through over the past few years and even more recently, the past few months.
I never imagined life to be this way and I have to admit, I wasn't quite prepared for it.
Tropical Storm Dementia has altered my course.
There have been times when I have resolved to stand strong and make the best of the situation.
And there have been times when I have laid in my bed, covers over my head, and cried at the storm that was looming overhead.
Last week was another reminder to me that when the storm comes, I need to buck up and make the best of it.
Had I stayed in that hotel bed and continued feeling sorry for myself, I would have missed out on a fabulous day.
There are moments now when I feel consumed with sadness.
I admit that some days, it would be much easier to stay in bed than to face that dark cloud.
But if I give up and let those feelings take over, I will miss out on making precious memories.
This morning I was sitting in my class at church when I saw my mom standing outside the open door of the room (we attend the same church building; but our services are at different times and our last hour of church overlaps their first hour of church...if that makes sense;) ).
Mom knows exactly where to find me when she arrives and always likes to find me before she seats herself for her own service.
She peered inside the room, saying "Cassandra?
Is she here...Cassandra?" I excused myself and went out to the hall to greet my mom.
It warmed my heart to see her (after being a week away from her) and to see her smiling and genuinely happy to see me.
My heart was filled with love for my mom and  I gave her a hug and told her that I had missed her.
In that moment, I felt so grateful that my mom is still here with me.
Although the person she once was is fading away, she is still here and she is teaching me great lessons of patience, service and unconditional love.
I am trying my hardest, each day, to rise above the storm.  
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 28, 2013>
Since before I can remember, my mom's family has been going camping every Memorial Weekend at a place called Heartbar Campground in the San Bernardino Mountains.
In talking with my Uncle, we established that this tradition began the year I was born (1981).
It's fun to look back and see how these camping trips have evolved over the years.
My earliest memories are walking across fallen trees with my cousins, our arms outstretched to our sides to balance ourselves while listening to my cousins speak of the legends of children gone before us who had fallen into the camp's pit toilets.
As we grew into teenagers, we spent most of our time going on hikes to the meadow and having big competitions with cards and board games.
As a young newlywed, I still enjoyed a good game with my cousins but I also enjoyed the quiet moments of laying out on our camp chairs, snuggling with a good book.
Nowadays, I watch my kids play and make their own memories with their cousins.
I try to get a chapter read or a hand of cards played in between my chasing of my 2 year old or wiping down dirty hands and faces.
And making sure that everything is going smoothly with mom.
Last year, we thought it would be our last year camping due to mom's condition.
Earlier this year, when my Uncle made his reservations, I decided to book a couple camp sites for my immediate family and in hopes that my siblings and parents would be able to join us.
We talked about camping with mom, and as it turned out, she was actually looking forward to going.
She even talked to my dad about bringing up her bike so she could be "active" and get some exercise.
That was a couple of weeks ago.
Things change on a daily basis with mom.
Thursday night, mom was complaining about feeling "so severe" and by Friday morning she told my dad she didn't want to go.
A lot of preparation goes into a trip like this (and in prepping mom and dad's trailer), so dad wasn't going to give in that easily.
We all figured she could feel severe at home or she could feel severe in the trailer.
At least if she was up in the mountains, she would have some distractions and maybe even feel better.
I didn't make it up the mountain until Friday night; my dad and my brother's family joined my Uncle earlier in the day.
According to them, mom was a mess when she first arrived.
She was complaining and throwing fits and was quite unhappy to be there.
As I drove into camp, I saw my two Aunts walking beside my mom and holding her arms while mom hunched over, taking baby steps to the trailer.
Oh great, I thought.
This is gonna be a long weekend!
Mom went to bed early Friday night and when she woke up Saturday morning, she seemed to be in better spirits.
Granted, I didn't sleep in the trailer and I don't know all that ensued the night before or even that morning.
But by the time I saw mom, she was drinking her Slim Fast and seemed to be over her temper tantrums.
She stayed in the trailer all morning and then eventually, in the early afternoon, she peeked her head out the door to see what was going on in the outside world.
Several of us were sitting in a circle, chatting with one another while the kids played nearby.
We called to mom and she apparently decided it was safe (and warm) enough to come outside and join the crowd.
She sat in the sunniest place the camp had to offer, wearing a thick, fleece sweater (it gets pretty hot in the sun...but mom likes the heat nowadays!)
She stayed with us for a little while and took a short walk with my Aunt (maybe 100 yards) before returning to her trailer to lay on her bed and take a rest.
And this is how the weekend went.
Mom came out for short periods of time, and then went back inside to rest on her bed.
She took short walks here and there, never more than a couple hundred yards at most.
Dad reminded her about the bike that she had begged him to bring up.
At first, she looked blankly at the bike and backed away from it.
After a while, she seemed to remember that she wanted to ride her bike and she asked dad to help her remember how to ride it.
We all watched, nervously, as mom teetered on the bike.
Last year, she rode around the campground with my nephew.
It didn't seem to us that she still had the ability to ride a bike.
We all started to protest that it was a bad idea to let her ride.
But...then she figured it out!
We were still very nervous about her riding the bike, so I hopped on dad's bike and decided I'd follow her to make sure she was safe.
We rode a couple hundred yards (at most) and then mom turned around and said, "Please let's go back to the trailer now." The next day (Sunday) mom made an appearance again outside her trailer.
She went back in to lay down and rest but surprised us all when she came back out to sit and snack on Poppycock (popcorn)...during her nap time!!!
Camping with kids (and mom) can be very fun but very tiring.
It's hard to find a peaceful moment.
On Sunday afternoon, the guys finally took the kids away on a hike, leaving us ladies with some peace and quiet as we lounged in the hammock and in our chairs, reading our books and enjoying the fresh, crisp breeze of the mountain air.
Peace and quiet at last!
No sooner than we opened our books then we heard music begin to blare from the trailer.
See, one of mom's favorite things to do on a Sunday afternoon while camping is to blast her radio as loud as can be playing her "church" music-usually the Mormon Tabernacle Choir.
My sister-in-law, family friend (Stephani) and I all looked at each other and sighed...and then chuckled.
Just our luck!
"At least it's not in Spanish," Stephani joked.
As the song ended and a commercial cut in, my eyes grew wide and I turned to Stephani, "It IS in Spanish!"  We laughed even harder and listened to mom's Spanish music while trying to read our books.
Not too long after, dad returned to the trailer and mom was complaining about the radio not working right.
She began nagging him to help her put on her CD and when he put it on, she turned it up full volume.
Dad looked out at me and said, "Why don't you see if your mom wants to go for a bike ride." I took that as my hint that dad needed a break and convinced my mom to take a ride with me.
Again to my surprise, mom was easily distracted away from her music and agreed to take a ride with me.
My sister was trying to get mom to pose for the camera, but mom was oblivious to her requests.
Please excuse this awful picture of me, keep in mind that we were camping, and I was roughing it!!
I told you before, this blog shows the good, the bad and the ugly!
Ha ha.
;)    This time, we made it more than 200 yards.
As we rode, mom talked about a road that she used to always go down, but was having trouble remembering where it was.
"And it was the main road place, we always went by that one place too where it went up like that and do you know where that is too?" When we reached a slight incline, mom stopped her bike and slid off the seat, her legs straddling the bike as she walked it up the hill.
"It's so weird too how this makes my legs hurt so much too like this and I wish I could get a bigger part too to sit on too because it hurts to sit on this.
Does it hurt you too to sit on it?" Mom chatted my ear off as we rode a couple loops around the campground.
She always let me know when she was done.
"Now take me back to the trailer please."   Overall, I think mom did pretty well camping...much better than I thought she would do!
She even called me today to let me know how happy she was about our weekend trip.
"It's so good too that everyone was able to go to that place together too for the camping thing too and even that you went on the bike with me too, that was so fun too so thank you for taking me too." I'm glad that she enjoyed herself.
Despite her intense desire to sit this one out, she ended up having a good time after all and I really feel like it was a good thing to get her out of the house.
It is very likely that this was the last camping trip that we will be able to bring her on (although we did think that last year...).
While we had a great time together as a family, it was sad to think that this trip probably marks the end of our family camping memories with mom.
But we will hold onto these memories forever.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 24, 2013>
Before I was a mom, I thought I had motherhood figured out.
I graduated with a degree in Early Childhood and thought I was pretty smart.
I attended several trainings for my job as a preschool teacher and read many articles and books on discipline, parenting, etc in an effort to help me in my job and prepare me for my future of motherhood.
What I learned upon having children, is that no book or training prepares you for the real life situations you face in daily parenting.
I found early on that the textbook logic answers don't always work and each child behaves and reacts differently to things.
A great example I can give to you is the toddler store meltdown.
When my first child was only a couple years old, she began having massive tantrums in the store when she couldn't have what she wanted.
The textbook answer to tantrums: do not give in to what they want and remove them from the situation.
If only that worked!
As I tried to put my brilliant parenting knowledge to action, and calmly explain to my daughter that she would NOT get anything when she threw fits, her tantrum only increased.
She made a big scene.
I could feel my face grow hot and redden as I struggled with a writhing, kicking, screaming 2 year old who couldn't have whatever object it was that she wanted at the time.
I could feel the judgmental stares burning into me and I remember one lady shaking her head and rolling her eyes.
I could've died!
I've had many a lessons such as this one, as I'm sure every mother in the universe has.
There is always someone ready to criticize, judge or make suggestions on your parenting techniques.
I have definitely gained some wisdom, and humility, since becoming a mother.
I know not to judge too harshly with the way a child behaves and the way a parent chooses to handle their child(ren).
It is such a personal thing and there isn't always a clear answer as to what is right and what is wrong.
And a child's bad behavior is not always a result of bad parenting.
Most parents are doing the best they can with the tools they have.
This same conflict exists with care giving.
Like parenting, it is a tough job.
There is not always a right or a wrong answer in a given situation.
Most of this is trial and error; we learn as we go what works with mom and what doesn't work.
People can be very quick to give their opinions on how you should handle your loved one even though they are not there on a day-to-day basis to really understand what is going on with that person.
I'm not saying that all advice is unwelcome.
There are times when it is appropriate.
Sometimes we may not know the best way to handle a situation and we look to others for ideas of things that have worked for them.
In the beginning of mom's diagnosis, many family members had their opinions on how her health should be managed.
What we also found was that the people who had the most opinions were the people who were around the least.
We made it very clear that if any member of the family wanted to be a part of mom's life, criticism and sneaking behind our backs to do what they felt was the better option for mom would not be tolerated in the least.
It seemed to nip the problem in the bud, for the time being.
Recently, I had one family member email me about an issue regarding mom and very quickly it became an attack on our care for mom.
"You should have done this a long time ago....I told you that you needed to...blah blah blah." Ironically, this person has only been over to see mom once in the past 8-12 months.
She rarely calls.
Only recently she has been talking to mom again on the phone (when mom calls).
I would hardly say she is in any position to give advice on how to handle the situation.
Nobody has the right to tell a caregiver what they are doing wrong or right.
This is an extremely difficult position to be in; to have to reverse the roles and take away mom's independence little by little and be forced to treat her a child.
Many times the things we have to do are hard and it takes a little bit of emotional prepping to do it.
It's not that we don't know what we should be doing, it's that we need to get some courage to do it.
Sometimes it is about choosing our battles and allowing mom to keep some of her freedoms for a time until it becomes necessary to take it away.
I repeat again, it is a difficult position to be in.
If you are just starting your journey with dementia, take it from me: people will come out of the wood work with all kinds of advice, opinions and even judgments on the care you give your loved one.
I think it's important early on to set the record straight and let everyone know who is in charge of the caregiving decisions.
Be firm and stand your ground.
It is easy to be taken advantage of, to question your ability, to feel inadequate in the care you give.
Seek advice when you need to, but turn to the right sources for help (you can visit my resources page for ideas).
Last of all, have confidence in yourself and don't let the naysayers bring you down.
There will always be someone there to criticize the job you are doing, no matter how well you do it.
Let it roll off your back and spend invest your energy where you need it most: in your caregiving.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, May 22, 2013>
I've read a lot about the issue of "wandering" with dementia patients.
Wandering is the term describing exactly that action: a person who wanders aimlessly with no destination or purpose.
Often times, the wandering person ends up lost, as they are disoriented with their surroundings.
Lucky for us, wandering hasn't been an issue with mom.
And with semantic dementia, getting lost isn't much of a problem.
While they forget many things, they are generally able to make their way through familiar routes and destinations.
Wandering occurs mostly in Alzheimer's patients and in later stages of dementia.
Lately, mom has been wanting to get out to walk.
She has walked places in the past and during the short period of time that she had a caregiver, mom and Teresa would take a walk every week up to Kmart, the Dollar Tree, etc.
Mom seems to enjoy getting out and getting exercise and exerting some sort of independence (so long as it's not too hot, too cold or too windy).
Last week, mom wanted to walk to see her sister, who lives a mile down the road.
Her other sister offered her a ride, but mom was adamant that she wanted to see "how good" she could do by walking.
Aunt Claudia followed mom in her car as mom walked the mile to Aunt Ellen's house.
It seems that mom has a newfound freedom in walking.
My Aunt forwarded me an email that mom wrote to her after her walk to her house: "Ellen, I walked so good from your house I walked over one thousand and several hundred walks and onto the third street before Claudia got me and I felt okay.
I wonder if I could ever try again all the way to some other friends houses too.
Even the lady from church that meets you I can go there too and also my friend that lives behind you and one that live above you too.
I hope I will be okay.
Love you, Deana" I was expressing some concerns about this issue in an online support group in which I'm a part of, and I mistakenly used the term "wandering" (for lack of a better word).
As I learned from others in the group, what mom is experiencing is not wandering.
The correct term would be "roaming".
Roaming differs from wandering in that there is a purpose and a destination in their walks with roaming.
I don't know if, as the disease progresses, the roaming will eventually become wandering.
My guess is that it will as she loses more and more of her memory and abilities.
For now, mom is intentional in her walks and does not get disoriented in where she's going.
The problem is safety.
I worry that mom will not notice traffic or be aware of potential hazards in the road.
What if she gets hit by a car?
What if someone tries to snatch her purse or gets angry with her because of her oblivious behavior to her surroundings?
What if she becomes dehydrated or tired or sick along the way?
How are people going to react when she shows up on their doorsteps and what if memory serves her wrong and she ends up on the wrong doorstep?
What if she eventually does become disorientated and loses her way?
The other problem is that she sometimes does things she shouldn't be doing when out.
For example, one day a check came in the mail (long story...the auto deposit was messed up).
Right away, mom walked up to the bank, cashed the check and hid the money.
Another example, yesterday mom walked up to the store to buy bacon.
We have purposely kept bacon out of the house because it is one of the only things she cooks these days and it is a major safety issue (you can catch up on that post here).
When a caregiver is with her, this obviously isn't an issue.
It is the hours or days that she is left alone for the day that it becomes a problem.
We have urged her not to go out alone but as with everything else, mom does not understand our concern and continues to do what she feels like doing.
All we can to is take preventative measures to avoid any problems while she is out roaming.
This is what we've come up with:  Mom takes her cell phone with her and has our numbers programmed into her phone.
I told mom to please call me when she plans to go out walking and to call me once she gets to her destination so that I know she made it safely.
This works when she is not being sneaky about where she is going.
Neighbors are aware of the situation and keep us informed when she leaves the house.
Sometimes they offer her rides out of concern for her walking alone.
They have my and my dad's phone numbers to contact us and let us know when she's out.
Lucky for us, the neighbors next door have been there since before my family moved in (over 25 years) and know us well and they spend a lot of time outdoors and in their garage working on cars and whatnot.
The clerks at the grocery store know mom and our situation.
At least 2 of them have asked for my phone number and help keep tabs on her when she shows up in there alone.
In fact, the store manager's father also suffers from FTD, so he is very watchful and concerned with mom and helps keep a good eye on her.
We bought an ID bracelet for mom.
Unfortunately, she won't wear it.
We're working on a solution for this...maybe attaching it to her purse.
I believe she has an ICE contact programmed into her phone as well.
We have to be attentive to situations.
For example, I saw the broccoli and cauliflower in the fridge on Monday.
So when mom called me yesterday and said she wanted to walk to the store, I knew exactly what she was going for.
Bacon.
(Dad bought her bacon bits, but it wasn't the right stuff).
We have to try and keep one step ahead of mom and anticipate what her next move will be.
It also helps that she has a routine, so we know what window of time she will attempt to go on her walks and can check in with her on those times.
Hopefully soon we will have people with her everyday and we won't have to worry about her getting out to walk on her own.
For those of you who find yourself in the same situation and roaming has become an issue with your loved one, take preventative measures!
Don't be afraid to talk to people in your community (neighbors, cashiers, etc) about your situation.
Chances are, they are concerned and willing to help.
For those of you who read my blog who are friends/neighbors that live close by mom, consider this your warning...you never know when my mom will show up on your doorstep ;)
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 16, 2013>
  Do you remember when you were a little kid and it was your birthday and you were SO excited that "today is my birthday!"?
All day, you wore a grin on your face and made sure to tell every person you came in contact with that it was your special day.
Sometimes, you might have even asked somebody what present they had gotten you for your birthday, while your mom stood by, cringing.
At least, that's how I remember my birthdays when I was a young child.
Mom is still very much aware of birthdays, hers in particular (and her brother, Jeff's birthday whose is a week before hers).
We wanted to celebrate with mom so she knew that we love and care about her.
I didn't quite have the energy to host anything at my house this year.
So we decided to keep it simple and take her to dinner to her favorite restaurant.
You guessed it: Outback Steakhouse.
It's not a big place, so we kept the group to a minimum and invited those family members who are closest to us (in proximity as well as in our everyday lives).
My dad, siblings and a few Aunts and Uncles who go that extra mile for mom came to celebrate with us.
When we arrived, dad went inside to check-in (we called ahead to get our name on the waiting list); they gave him a pager and he returned outside where we stood in the cool breeze and chatted with one another.
Mom, however, was very concerned with everyone's standing around when she was ready to go inside and eat.
She kept urging everyone to come inside so we could sit down to eat.
We tried to explain to her about the pager and that we had indeed checked in; we were simply waiting outside because there was more space and fresh air.
She could not understand the concept.
"I don't know why everyone won't come in now, I'm hungry!
I don't want to eat severely late!" Eventually, she marched right inside that restaurant, agitated that we were all seemingly hanging around and ignoring her pleas to be seated.
I followed after her to find her approaching a hostess.
"We need to sit down now, we have so many people here too.
We have 14 people here and we need to sit down now." They began asking if her name had been put on the list and I interjected, stating that we had already checked in and, in fact, had a pager.
Mom was still insistent, however, that we be seated.
The hostess looked at mom, then back at me, in a bit of confusion.
I quietly whispered that mom has dementia and didn't quite understand what we meant by the pager/waiting list.
The hostess nodded, smiled and assured mom we would be seated shortly and welcomed her to have a seat inside.
Mom took a seat inside, still complaining that everyone else was outside and they needed to come inside.
I sat beside mom and tried to distract her from the waiting game.
"How has your birthday been?
Did anybody call you?" Mom thought for a minute and noted the people who did-and even more so, the people who DIDN'T- call or send cards.
She was concerned about her siblings who had not yet made contact with her on her special day.
After several minutes of chit chat, mom announced that she had to go to the bathroom.
I pointed her in the direction of the ladies room and soon after she left, my dad came inside to let me know that her brother was going to call her to wish her a happy birthday (and to make sure she answered her phone).
Mom returned from the bathroom with her phone to her ear, her hand cupped around the speaker of the phone as if she was on a very secret call.
I had to chuckle at the sight of it.
As soon as we were seated, the waitress came to order our drinks and mom tried to speak over everyone to order her food.
We explained to her that she was only ordering drinks and the waitress asked mom what she would like to drink.
Mom shook her head, "No I already have my drink," mom said, pointing to her can of Diet Root Beer that she had brought in.
She continued to try and order her food and when the waitress was finally ready to take our order, mom was the first to speak over everyone to tell the waitress what she wanted.
She also made sure that she knew the reason we were there.
"And also I wanted to tell you that it's my birthday today so if you could please bring me one of those things, like when we came here for her birthday" (pointing to my Aunt) "they brought her that thing too for her birthday, birthday thing...I think it was that...ice cream...stuff for birthdays, so if you could bring that too please," mom ordered, waving her hand around the table as she spoke.
We all laughed and the waitress chuckled (we had clued her in to mom's condition to prevent any confusion at mom's behavior).
Mom ordered her favorite dish, "The meat stuff that's cut up, kind of smaller pieces..."  Translation: Baby back ribs with french fries.
She polished off those ribs faster than you could blink!!
Mom opened cards and presents with a smile on her face.
She was so excited that my Aunt had bought her an Outback gift card.
She waved it in front of my dad, declaring, "We can use this to pay for our food tonight!" Dad reminded her to say thank you, and she complied-just like a child.
The best part of our night came at dessert time.
Mom was SO enthusiastic about the hot fudge brownie sundae that was brought to her and she wanted everyone to partake of the deliciousness.
She asked each and every person, individually, if they would like to please try her dessert.
If one objected, she frowned and looked genuinely hurt as she said,  "What?
You don't want any?
But why not?
It's so delicious!" Then on to the next person, "Cassandra do you want to try?
Do you want a bite?
It's so delicious, it's so good.
Try it, will you take a bite and try it?" I took the spoon that she was waving in front of my face and gave an exaggerated response, "Mmm, it's so good mom.
Thank you."  Down the line she went until finally she could no longer reach her guests at the end of the table.
She then stood up, calling down to my Aunt at the end and pleading with her to try her dessert as she waved her plate and spoon overhead.
"It's okay Deana, I ordered my own dessert," Aunt Sharon replied, holding back her laughter.
"Huh?
You want to try it?
It's so delicious, it's so yummy, will you try it?" As we all giggled, Aunt Sharon finally gave in to mom's pleading and took a bite of her dessert.
"Mmm, that's very good Deana.
Thank you," Aunt Sharon said, graciously.
We were all laughing quite a bit.
What a sight to see!
After mom had shared her dessert with all who would accept, she sat down and stirred up what was left of the brownie, hot fudge and ice cream, making it into a soup.
She ate just about every bite until she was finally too full to eat any more.
Afterwards, we went outside to take a family photo.
From the left: myself, my twin brother, Joe, mom, my sister, Christina, and my dad.
Happy 52nd Birthday to mom.
I'm sure that this was never what she envisioned 52 to look like.
It's sad to think about how young mom was when all of this began and hard to think about and wonder how many birthdays we have left with her.
For now, we live in the moment and I'm glad that we were able to take her out for her special day.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 9, 2013>
I might not be too popular for writing this post.
Very likely, some will be offended at what I have to say.
But my intent in sharing this blog is to share the whole journey: the good, the bad and the ugly.
It defeats my purpose in writing to pick and choose which pleasant or unpleasant things I will share.
When someone you love is diagnosed with a terminal illness, emotions run high.
You will encounter many people-friends and family alike-who are "devastated" with the news and some will spend days crying about it.
Through weepy eyes and sorrowful voices, they will tell you, "If you need anything-anything at all-I'm here.
Please don't hesitate to call." The problem is, talk is cheap.
If you are just starting out on your dementia journey, take it from me.
There will be many well-wishers and good-intended people in your lives...in the beginning.
As time goes on, you will learn who is just talking and who actually means what they say.
Sure, people get busy and people have their own lives and their own problems.
Others are just full of excuses, to put it bluntly.
But why cry and pity and offer to help if it isn't sincere?
Lately I've been feeling very discouraged.
I try to look at the bright side and see the cup half full.
When my dad had the ceiling fiasco, we had friends and family who dropped everything to come over right away and help.
My heart was touched and full of gratitude for those people who were there for us in our time of need.
But we also had the well wishers, "if you need any help..." who couldn't be bothered to even return phone calls to help my dad with some finishing touches (might I add that my dad is not a freeloader, he was going to pay these "friends" what they were worth to get the job done quickly so as to restore order for my confused mother).
This is just one example of many that I could share.
One of our biggest struggles is caring for my mom.
She is to the point that we really aren't comfortable leaving her alone.
It is impossible for me to be there with her everyday.
My dad has to work; he's not even close to retirement.
When it came time to put those words into actions, there was little help to be found.
My mom has one brother and his dear, sweet wife, who go over every week.
I know it's a big commitment.
I know there are probably other things they would like to do with their time.
I know because I'm in the same boat; I have a lot on my plate as well.
But their love for my mom and my dad keeps them dedicated to coming over despite the obstacles they may face in coming.
We haven't been this lucky with everyone.
We have had some family volunteer to come over, only to "call in" most weeks that they aren't feeling good or have other plans and can't come in.
Some have volunteered to help "in any way" but then want it done on their terms only, such as dropping mom off at their house for the day.
Anyone reading this who is caring for a loved one with dementia knows that that is NOT going to work out too well.
With mom's obsessions and rigid routines, she thrives best in her own environment.
There's no way we could get her to go to someone else's house for babysitting.
We've had some who have said they are available to help and then expressed their hopes to others that we hire them on as a paying caregiver.
We've had some offer to help clean, "You just let me know what you need done and I'll do it." When I asked her if she might be able to do some dusting around the house, her response was, "Oh, I really hate dusting.
That's my least favorite chore." Needless to say, that was the last time she volunteered to help with chores.
We've had some who have offered to come and help but then asked for gas money or to borrow dad's car to drive mom across town to run errands.
And complained at how "unfair" it is that dad would not let them borrow the car (despite the fact that he did give them gas money).
The thing that hurts the most about this is that there is no spirit of love and service.
This is not family.
Family is supposed to be there for each other through thick and thin with no expectations of anything in return.
At least that is what my dad taught me.
That is the kind of family member he has been to everyone.
In fact, that is the kind of MAN he is.
Throughout my life, I have watched my dad give countless hours of service to others: friends, neighbors, family members, church members (my mom has given lots of service, particularly in church, over the years as well).
He has done it all out of the goodness of his heart.
He's never given a minute of service-not even a minute!- with the expectation of gaining something for himself.
He would never even think of such a thing!!
Lately I've really been struggling with feelings of bitterness and resentment at the lack of reciprocation my parents have received in their hour of need.
In part, maybe it's our own fault.
Outside of family, it is extremely hard to ask for help.
My dad won't ever ask for help (except in the instance such as the ceiling, where he fully expects to compensate that help).
But family and close friends and friends from church know of the struggles we face.
They ask; I am open in sharing our struggles and challenges.
I feel abandonment for my dad, if that makes sense.
I am hurt for him; hurt that people can't see the sadness and the despair and the challenges he faces and try to help lighten his load.
As if it isn't hard enough to have lost most of the woman he has known and loved nearly his entire life, he now faces the challenges of balancing all of her duties that she once tended to (cooking, cleaning, laundry, bill paying, grocery shopping, etc) WHILE working his business and WHILE caring for her.
To have family offer to help and then flake out when push comes to shove only adds more hurt and more stress to the situation.
I know he feels he is in way over his head...we all do!
Last Saturday morning, my husband took our boys over to my dad's house (while dad was at work) and mowed his lawn.
He didn't tell him he was coming over, nor did he plan on telling him that he was the one who did it.
He had our boys pick up the leaves and clean up the trash that the wind had blown into the yard.
Later that day, my dad called me and said he knew Jeff had come over.
We both feigned ignorance at his accusations, but he said this, "I came home and noticed somebody did my lawn for me.
I was feeling pretty good, thinking someone from church must love me and must have come over to mow my lawn.
But then I realized that nobody would do that for me; I have no friends so it must have been Jeff." It hurt me to hear him say those words: "I have no friends".
After all he has done to help others in his life, it's a shame that he feels this way.
I know many who love my dad and think the world of him.
But it's true what they say: actions speak louder than words; now more than ever.
It isn't enough to put the offer out there.
If you don't mean it, don't say it.
It hurts more in the end when people give false illusions of compassion and concern.
For those of you reading this who are in my shoes, you are probably shouting your "amen" at home!
You know exactly what I'm talking about.
For those of you who know someone who is struggling with this disease, or any terminal/debilitating illness for that matter, I challenge you: reach out to those people!
Don't wait for an engraved invitation to help.
Do not give empty offers and vain condolences for their situation.
Be proactive and do something!
Take a meal over, visit with the person, show up and do their yard work or clean their dishes, take them a plate of cookies...even just sending a card or a note to let them know that you are thinking about them can mean a lot!
There are many lessons I am learning in this journey of dementia.
This is just another one of those lessons.
I am far from perfect and I'm sure at one time or another in my life I have said the same thing, "Let me know if you need anything." I think twice before I use that phrase now.
I will take this as a life lesson to be a do-er, not a say-er. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 30, 2013>
This is a somewhat of a hard post to write, because it is so personal for me.
But in sharing the journey of dementia, I think it is a very essential post to write and share with others who are on a similar journey.
Around the holiday season (Thanksgiving and Christmas), I started to feel very down and even depressed.
I think a big part of it was the time of year, and not having mom "there" throughout the season.
I felt a sense of loneliness in my Christmas baking and holiday planning.
I found myself just wishing and waiting for the holidays to finally be over.
For those who know me, you know that this is not typical for me.
At all.
I LOVE the holidays and everything they have to offer: traditions, festivities, music... By the end of December, I knew that I needed to do something about my situation.
I found myself on the verge of tears nearly everyday over seemingly little things: I didn't have enough butter to make the batch of cookies I wanted to bake or I couldn't find the kids shoes as I was rushing to get them off for school in the morning.
I couldn't vocalize what I was feeling because if I did, I knew I would break down.
Nobody likes a cry baby.
I've been taking my step-daughter and my adopted daughter (formerly a niece) to therapy for a few years now, just to help them to overcome some of the obstacles they've faced in their short lives and to have a safe place to express how they are feeling.
I knew that it was probably time to see a therapist myself.
I fought it for quite some time.
I was worried about having a stigma attached to me for having to see a shrink.
I didn't want them to push medications as a solution for how I was feeling.
I told myself that this was a mind-over-matter kind of situation...I just needed to be stronger.
But try as I might, I just couldn't shake off the sadness that hung over me like a dark cloud.
By January, I finally picked up the phone and made myself an appointment to see a therapist.
I told them I wanted someone who specialized in grief counseling, and they set me up for an appointment the next week [I will refer to her as Dr. K].
I kept this a secret; only my husband knew that I was going (and eventually one other person).
I wasn't ready for anyone to know.
I felt very anxious at my first meeting with Dr. K. As I sat in the waiting room, I almost felt like there was a target on me and that everyone was staring at me.
I don't know why...I certainly DO NOT think any less of anyone who needs to see a counselor.
For some reason, when it came to myself, it was hard to admit that I needed help.
The meeting went well.
Dr. K was very sympathetic and very compassionate.
I opened up and shared some of my deep feelings.
She sat and listened thoughtfully, occasionally offering some words of wisdom and asking questions.
The question that sticks out the most in my mind was, "Do you ever let yourself have a good cry?
I mean, just really let it out?"   I sat back and thought about that for a minute.
The answer was "no".
I knew that it was good to let it out sometimes.
But I had been so focused on being strong that I realized I was suppressing all of my emotions and not giving them a release.
We talked some more throughout that session about the importance of grieving and allowing myself to cry and "let it all out".
She told me how important it was to do some things for myself-get out for an evening by myself or with a friend or on a date night; allow myself to read a book or have a hobby.
I struggle with this as I try to balance my load: my family, my marriage, my 5 children, my mom and my dad; the list goes on.
Sometimes I feel guilty for taking time out and doing things for myself-it almost feels selfish.
But what Dr. K helped me to realize is that it is not selfish to take time for myself, it is essential.
Essential for my emotional well being and essential for my family (you know that saying...if mom's not happy, nobody's happy!)
I met with Dr. K a few more times until a new realization dawned on me: that I was going to be okay.
I realized that when I let myself have a good cry, I don't feel as depressed.
I realized that it's okay to let myself breathe.
I can take time for myself and not feel guilty about it!
Most of all, I realized that I have a strong network of people in my life that I can lean on for support.
I realized that while I was paying Dr. K to listen to me (and don't get me wrong, sometimes that is necessary), I have a small group of people in my life who I feel safe with; who I can vent to, cry on, lean on and depend on to help get me through the hard times (and at no cost!).
I don't know why I didn't realize that before!
I guess it took talking to a complete stranger to figure it out.
But I am grateful for those close friends and family members who love me unconditionally and allow me to be myself-rain or shine-and give me support on this journey.
This road with mom is always going to be bumpy.
It's always going to hurt.
It's going to get harder before it gets easier.
I know that and I am doing my best to prepare for that.
And I am no longer afraid to let myself have a good cry (even if it is only in my closet!
;) ) I would say to any of my readers who struggle with the idea of seeing a therapist: give it a try.
You may find that it helps you to keep some sanity and to learn some coping techniques.
Or, you may discover that you've had the tools you needed all along. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 28, 2013>
Today we celebrate dad's 53 years of life.
Although most of our celebrating was yesterday.
We kept it simple this year by going out to dinner at the Spaghetti Factory (without kids!!)
and going back to dad's house to play our favorite family card game: Scat.
Dad has been itching to get a group together to play Scat for a while.
What better time than his birthday?
To help us celebrate, dad's sister and husband came,  my brother and sister came with their spouses and our family friends, the Klamms, also joined us.
Mom still remembers important dates, such as birthdays and anniversaries, so she knew dad's birthday was coming up.
I prepped her days in advance that we would be going out to dinner to celebrate.
Knowing mom's rigid routine, we planned to leave early (I told her we would swing by and pick them up at 5:00) and dad chose the Spaghetti Factory knowing that at least one of mom's favorites was on the menu: tortellini.
Of the few foods mom loves to eat, tortellini is among them.
But not just tortellini...she must have her frozen mixed vegetables smothered in 'Smart Balance' and garlic.
Lots of garlic.
Last Monday I told mom where we were going; she couldn't remember The Old Spaghetti Factory.
I described the restaurant to her and explained that they had her favorite tortellini there, but she still could not remember.
And she was concerned about what foods they would have there that she would like.
Later that same morning, as were shopping in Target, mom went down the refrigerated food aisle and pointed out the "same kind" of tortellini that she loves to buy.
I took that as my golden opportunity to explain to her that the package she was pointing to was exactly the kind of food that would be at the restaurant for dad's birthday.
A couple rounds of repetition and mom understood what I was saying.
Saturday morning, I called mom to remind her about dinner that night.
She remembered and was prepared to go.
No sooner than I pulled out of my driveway, at 5:04 pm, did I get a call on my cell phone from mom.
"Cassandra, I thought you said you were coming to get us at 5:00.
It's getting too late for dinner and I need to eat, we need to go.
Are you coming?" she said, hardly pausing to take a breath.
"I'm in my car and on my way to get you mom," I told her.
"But you said you were going to be here at 5:00, why aren't you here yet?" "I'm coming mom, I'm in my car," I repeated.
"What?
You said you're coming now?
But why aren't you here yet?
You said 5:00," she whined.
"It's only 5:04 mom.
I will be there in 3 minutes.
Look at your clock and I will be there in 3 minutes," I said, as my husband chuckled in the driver's seat next to me.
"Are you coming down my street now?
Are you at that stop sign place now?
Where are you?" I firmly, yet calmly, told her again that I would be there very soon and that I was going to hang up the phone.
A couple minutes later, we pulled into the driveway to see mom's face peering out the curtains at the living room window.
I walked in to let my dad know we were there (as if my mom wasn't going to let him know!)
and mom pushed us out the door, complaining that, "It's getting too late for dinner." I felt a bit uneasy as I watched mom walk out the front door with a plastic bag.
A quick peek inside the bag confirmed my suspicions: a container of mixed vegetables and a can of diet Root Beer.
We've had this problem before: mom trying to bring her own food into a restaurant.
A couple years ago we took mom to her favorite steak house and she brought out her own can of Root Beer and started pouring it into a cup.
The waitress told her she couldn't bring in her own drinks and mom carried about her business, pouring the soda, not seeming to hear a word she said.
We tried to tell mom that she couldn't bring in her own drink and she became a little hostile with us, insisting that she could too bring her own drink because they didn't have anything she liked.
This incident was before her diagnosis, so weren't quite sure how to handle it back then (it was at the time that we were suspecting her behavior was due to brain damage from her surgery).
In the end, the waitress had let her keep her soda, but let us know that it would not be allowed in the next time.
I was nervous about the confrontation that would likely ensue at the restaurant.
Not only was she bringing in a soda, but mixed vegetables!
This wasn't going to be pretty.
We conversed in the car-my brother, Joe, his wife, Natalie, my dad, husband and myself-about the situation.
It was decided that it might be best to just explain the situation to the hostess or waitress when we arrived at the restaurant and hope that they would be accommodating.
I felt skeptical.
After we checked in and everyone took a seat in the lobby while they prepped our table, I approached the host and explained the situation.
He told me he would need to consult with his manager.
Great.
My nerves took over as I stood waiting for the manager to come up.
I didn't want a confrontation with my mom.
I didn't want to put a damper on dad's birthday.
I wondered if we should have just tried to sneak the food in (the problem with that is that mom is not very inconspicuous about it).
The manager came to the front desk and my Aunt came to my side in support.
It helps that she's a nurse.
I figured I could try to use that to my advantage if needs be...she assured me they could not discriminate her disability.
I felt more confident with her by my side.
I first told the manager that we were there to celebrate my dad's birthday, and then I explained that my mom had dementia and that with this dementia comes certain obsessions.
One obsession is her food.
I told her that mom planned to order the tortellini but that she must have her mixed vegetables to go with it.
She also has to have to her Mug Root Beer, which most restaurants do not carry (she despises Barqs Root Beer).
I told the manager that we tried to talk her out of bringing food in, but that she lacks comprehension of what we are telling her.
For a minute, I thought she was going to turn us away.
But relief soon swept over me as she said, "That is not a problem at all, don't even worry about it.
You don't ever have to worry about that at all when you come to the Spaghetti Factory." Confrontation averted!
We thanked her and went about our evening, enjoying dad's birthday dinner.
Mom happily dumped her veggies onto her plate of tortellini, giving it a good stir before devouring it in minutes.
I even got a picture of mom and dad.
I have to say, this is one of the best pictures I've gotten of them over the past several years.
I think mom looks quite pretty and more like herself than I've seen in a very long time.
I just want to say, one more time, HAPPY BIRTHDAY to my awesome dad.
The past few years have been really hard for our family, beginning with the loss of my grandparents...then the diagnosis of my mom.
The past couple months have been especially difficult for our family, due to other circumstances.
Losing my mom has been gradual over the past few years, but each day seems harder and harder and she slips away more and more.
And I know the person who suffers the most is my dad.
I hope that he was able to enjoy himself for all of his birthday festivities.
And I am also very glad that mom was able to be there with us, even with all her quirks! 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 22, 2013>
Today I took mom out to Target to buy a few household essentials and to shop for dad's birthday, which is this upcoming weekend.
I wasn't sure how this would go.
For those faithful readers of mine, you can understand why I would be a little apprehensive about gift shopping with mom, after our Christmas shopping experience.
As usual, mom had a list ready to go when I picked her up.
She generally makes her list by looking at the labels of the product she wants; sometimes there is no empty bottle to look at and she has to write down from memory what it is she wants.
This usually requires much interpretation.
Among the items she needed was Lysol toilet bowl cleaner, window soap, sink spray, dishwasher soap, fruit and table soap.
On our way out, I made a quick call to my dad, just to double check how he wanted me to have mom pay for this.
He asked about her list and I told him the items which were on it.
He informed me that she already had Lysol toilet bowl cleaner in the laundry room cupboard.
In fact, she had bought a 4-pack the last time he took her out to run errands.
I turned to mom and let her know that she still had plenty of Lysol toilet bowl cleaner at home.
Immediately, she took my words as an attack; she seemed only to hear the words "you don't need to buy that"...the rest of my words were lost in space.
She became angry and agitated with me, "I do too need that.
Your dad doesn't let me buy what I need, my kind is better than the kind he buys too.
I wish you wouldn't call him when you take me out, you guys don't support me!" I tried explaining that dad was fine with her buying the other items on the list-and he was fine with Lysol for that matter-they simply didn't need it.
Eventually, after a lot of back and forth about it, she seemed to be catching on to what I was saying.
"Laundry room, what?
Laundry room?
Bathroom, living room, laundry room...what?
I'm trying to think, laundry room." I explained to her what the laundry room is..."the place where you wash your clothes" and after several minutes of deliberation, mom remembered what the laundry room is.
"I don't remember ever seeing any in there.
There isn't any in that front room too.
I haven't seen any." I reassured her (over and over again) that the Lysol was in the laundry room cupboard.
Eventually she gave up the fight, though she seemed skeptical that the Lysol really was in the cupboard.
But not another word was said about the Lysol toilet bowl cleaner.
As we pulled in to the Target parking lot, mom's finger set on the seatbelt's release button, I urged her not to run ahead of me.
"Please wait for me mom, I'd like to shop with you." To my great surprise, she actually waited for me this time outside the car while I got my boys out of their car seats.
She walked with me into the store and I explained to her that I needed to make a really quick exchange at the customer service desk.
"I don't know why I can't just go shop around here, why I have to wait for you." And with that, mom grabbed a shopping cart and took off down the aisle towards the house cleaning products, leaving me struggling in the return line with my two little boys.
It took about 10 minutes for me to get through the return and find my mom.
She was right where I figured she'd be-in the cleaning aisle, concentrating on her list.
Only one item had made it into her cart in that lapse of time (the "sink spray").
She struggled to remember what dishwashing soap is (and what a dishwasher is) and was looking for the window soap.
I grabbed a bottle of Windex from a nearby shelf as she inspected it.
She then asked me where to find the table soap.
I figured she must be talking about dust spray, so we made our way to the back aisle and I picked out a can of dust spray for her.
"Where does that say table soap on it?
?...I hope that's the right thing," she said.
When we were done with the list, I asked her if she had any ideas of what she wanted to get for dad for his birthday.
Much to my surprise, she responded right away, "I was thinking that card thing to that place he likes so much, Home Depot.
He really likes to shop there too." "Perfect idea mom!
He loves Home Depot."  This was going to much easier than I thought!!
The only problem is, nothing is that easy when dealing with a person with dementia.
To start with, she was very objectionable about my suggestion to walk next door to Home Depot to buy the gift card.
She was insistent that she could buy the card at Stater Bros. (our local grocery store).
"Mom, I'm not going to Stater Bros. We are already here and you can buy the gift card here.
I'll show you." She finally gave in to my coaxing to get the gift card at Home Depot.
But not without questioning me further, "How do you know they sell it here?
I hope they have it here." I led the way to cash register and showed her the display of gift cards.
I picked out a nice one with a picture of a heart made out of tools.
Wrong move.
Mom did not recognize it as a gift card and rejected it.
"No, that's not what I'm looking for, no!
I want to go to Stater Bros, that's where the really good ones are.
This isn't what I want." I tried to keep calm and patiently explain to her that it's the same thing.
I quickly put the heart-pictured gift card back and picked up the standard, Home Depot gift card-the one I knew she would recognize.
She took the card from me and inspected it carefully.
"Where does it say this is a gift card?
No, this isn't the one I buy.
Where does it say the money on it?
This isn't what I buy.
I don't want to buy this one, no.
I'll go to Stater Bros." I was getting frustrated, but it doesn't do any good to lose patience.
Instead, I pulled the cashier over and asked her if she could confirm to my mom that what she held was indeed a gift card.
"Yes, that is a gift card," she said with a smile.
"See mom, it's exactly what you're looking for." "No.
Where does it say the money on it?
This isn't the same, no," she continued.
Back and forth we went as I tried to keep my cool.
I told her that she would be better off to get it there because I wasn't going to Stater Bros, and besides-she didn't want dad to see what she was getting for him.
I led her to the register to pay as she continued to protest and as I continued to reassure her that this was what she wanted to get him.
She kept resisting because the price wasn't on the card (it was the type where you tell the cashier how much to put on).
I  asked mom what amount she was looking for and she told me her price.
I asked the cashier to please write the amount on the card as to satisfy mom.
She finally seemed okay with the card and paid for it.
*Whew!
* I thought it would be nice to take mom to lunch and made the suggestion to her.
I tried this with her last week as well.
She insisted that she would go home to have her "really good sandwich" and try as I might, I could not convince her to go to lunch with me :( "Mom, you never want to go to lunch with me anymore.
I miss going to lunch with you...won't you go out to lunch with me?" I asked.
She did not respond at all to what I said, but instead looked ahead out the front windshield.
Over and over throughout our 10 minute drive home, I tried to get a response, and each time I got nothing in return.
So...no lunch date today.
BUT, we accomplished the most important goal which was to get dad a birthday present from mom.
And it wasn't laundry soap!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 15, 2013>
Mom is very resistant to having caregivers come over to her house.
She thinks that she is fine and doesn't understand why people need to be there with her.
She will find any opportunity to let each of us [caregivers] know that we aren't needed for our "shift".
Sometimes, she makes up her own opportunities, as you may have read about with our caregiver, Teresa.
It comes as no surprise that she is at it again, this time using her 'broken' house an excuse.
My Uncle forwarded me this email from mom last night, asking if it was just another rouse from mom or if there was more to the story: "Mike, Our living room broke down and it is still a mess so you might not be able to come this week because it isn't finished yet and there is nothing in the living room to sit on and other things are a mess.
Deana" Oh mom!
I have to admit, I got a good chuckle out of that one.
Mom sure is a sneaky one!!
[If you missed my post last night about the "severe emergency" over the weekend, you can find that here.]
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 14, 2013>
Thursday night, my dad received a phone call notifying him that our hours are up for the caregiver program we qualified for.
Long story, but in a nutshell, the Alzheimer's Association approved us for a program which allotted us a certain number of hours with a caregiver.
We were under the impression that it was 30 hours a month from March until May.
Apparently it was 30 hours total.
So this left us without a caregiver on Friday.
Friday morning, I was prepping for my son's birthday party that I was to be throwing on Saturday.
The cupcakes had just gotten out of the oven and I was making another batch of airplane lollipops when my husband informed me that our family friend, Shaun, was going to stop by my parent's house to get some roofing paper from dad's garage.
We've been working on a treehouse for our kids and the roof was the last thing to finish up before the birthday party (Shaun was helping with that part).
Knowing my mom, Jeff suggested to me that I call her beforehand to let her know that Shaun was dropping by so that she wasn't caught off guard.
I figured that would be a good idea since she would likely not recognize Shaun when he showed up on her doorstep (on a side note...Shaun's family has been friends with our family since I was a kid; our parents were best friends before his mom and dad moved away to Utah about 8 years ago).
I called mom and no sooner than I told her Shaun would be stopping by than she interrupted me, "I'm having a severe emergency at our house right now.
It's so weird, weird things are happening and there's things crashing down in the living room too and making really loud noises and stuff falling from the ceiling too and it's real wet too.
Everything is getting wet and I tried calling your dad and he's not answering his phone." I tried to make sense of what she was telling me.
I remembered a leak in a small area over the couch a few months ago during a rainy spell.
I figured the leak must have returned somehow and that she was making a mountain out of a molehill; everything is severe to mom.
"Mom Shaun is coming by in a few minutes and he'll check it out for you, okay?
He'll see what's going on for you and fix something if there's a problem," I tried explaining to her.
"Shaun.
Who is Shaun?" she asked.
We went back and forth for a few minutes as I tried to remind her who Shaun is.
Again, I reassured her that he would be there very soon and would check out whatever was going on, but she was insistent that I come over.
"I just wish you would come see what's going on right now." I had so much to get done for the birthday party, but I could tell that mom really wanted me to come over and assist her with her "severe emergency." I finally told her that I would be there in 5 minutes.
I hung up the phone, covered my cupcakes and was on my way out the door for what I figured would be a quick trip to soothe my mom.
My jaw dropped to the ground when mom opened the front door and I got a glimpse inside.
"Oh my gosh Mom!" I exclaimed, trying not to panic.
I think I repeated myself several times as I stood in shock, trying to make sense of what I saw.
Mom began rambling about how weird this was, "I don't know what all this stuff is...what happened there?...this is so weird...this has never happened before...and it's so wet too, I can't even walk to the kitchen..." I noticed that water was spraying down the doorway that separates the living room from the kitchen.
The floor was covered in water.
I knew immediately that the water needed to be shut off.
As luck would have it, Shaun works in plumbing.
I called him right away and asked him if he was on his way and (probably in a very panicked voice) told him what was happening.
He told me how to shut off the water and I quickly found the valve and shut it off.
I called my dad next and got his voicemail.
I called my brother-in-law, who works with my dad, with no luck.
I called my sister.
No answer.
I finally texted a picture to my sister and told her to have Melvin (her husband) call me right away.
She responded quickly that she would call Melvin and Shaun and Stephani (Shaun's wife) texted that they were just around the corner and coming as fast as they could!
Now that I knew help was coming, I knew I needed to get mom in a safe place.
She kept making circles down the hallway and through her bedroom, which wraps around to a room addition that leads into the kitchen.
I followed her around the house and urged her to come out and wait with me on the front porch.
I wasn't sure if there were any other weak spots in the ceiling and I didn't want her to get hurt.
Mom was concerned about the floor being so wet and ignored my pleas.
"I need to clean this up, it's so wet too," she said as she hopelessly tried mopping up inches of water off the floor.
"I just don't understand where all this water is coming from, it's not even raining outside!" After much coaxing and pleading, I was finally able to get her to abandon the mop and follow me out to the front door.
My dad finally called me back and I told him we had a very serious situation and he was needed at home.
When I told him the ceiling had fallen in, I think he was envisioning the same little spot over the couch that I had imagined when mom first told me of her severe emergency.
He told me he was just finishing up at the tile store and was on his way.
Mom kept asking for dad and I reassured her (over and over) that he was on his way.
"Your dad is real good, he can fix that too.
Are you sure you definitely talked to him?
This is so weird..." Within 5 minutes, Shaun and Stephani arrived as did my husband, Jeff, who just so happened to be home early from work that day.
Right away, Shaun got a ladder and got up in that ceiling and figured out the source of the leak: the drip line that connected to the refrigerator.
Once we figured that we were safe, and the rest of the ceiling wasn't going to fall in on us, we quickly got to work cleaning up the remnants of the ceiling that had thrown up all over the living room.
It was a huge, disgusting mess.
Fortunately, not too much was damaged.
A few picture frames met their end, and the bookcase housing the DVD's busted, but dad's brand new TV and the furniture survived with no damage (other than the nastiness of the ceiling that had splattered all over)                  As soon as mom saw that people were there to help her, she noted that it was lunch time and made her way into the kitchen to make a sandwich.
She was a little confused as to why there was no water on to rinse her tomato.
She stood by the sink and ate her sandwich as we started cleaning up the mess.
We brought in a large trash bin from outside and started shoveling ceiling innards and broken picture frames into the bin.
The dust and the smell was so overwhelming that I found a couple of masks for Stephani and me to wear while we worked.
My sister showed up shortly after and assisted us in cleaning up the waste and moving furniture out of the room; the "clean" stuff went into a bedroom while we wiped down DVD's and other knick-knacks that were covered in mushy insulation.
It was embedded in every nook and cranny and splattered as far as the walls in the hallway.
What a mess to clean up!
By the time my dad arrived on scene, we had the bulk of the ceiling cleaned up off the floor and had started moving things out of the living room.
I think it saved him from having a panic attack.
Ha ha.
He walked into the room and very thoughtfully and quietly looked up at the gaping hole in his ceiling.
I was expecting some sort of a meltdown (he'd had a stressful week as it was!)
but he handled it rather well.
Right away, he got to work with us cleaning up the mess, repairing the water line and prepping the room to repair the ceiling.
Thank goodness my dad is a handy man, he knows how to do it all!
[It is now Sunday evening that I write this, and the entire living room ceiling has been replaced already!]
Mom eventually moseyed her way back into the living room and noticed the progress we had made in cleaning up the broken ceiling off the floor.
I thought she would be happy to see the mess gone, but the gaping hole above her left her confused.
"What did you do with that stuff that goes up there?
That stuff that was on the floor?" she asked, pointing to the empty floor.
"We threw it in the trash can, mom," I answered, explaining that dad would get new boards to put in it's place.
Mom didn't understand.
She shook her head.
"No, you can't throw those things away.
It needs to be fixed!
That has to go back up there.
You can't leave that like that, you have to put that stuff back up there.
We can't have that like that!" Mom raced to the trash can and began looking through to find the pieces of the ceiling in an effort to put it back together again.
I tried to break it down simply for her.
"That part of the ceiling is broken Mom.
Dad is going to get a new ceiling and fix it.
Don't worry, there won't be a hole for long." She wasn't satisfied with our answers and explanations, but dad was finally able to convince her to go play a game on the computer while we finished cleaning up the mess.
A couple minutes later she returned to the living room with a birthday balloon in hand.
"Cassandra you forgot to take this round thing too for Ryder's birthday.
Please take it, will you take it?" "I'm really busy cleaning right now but if you leave it in the front bedroom I will take it home with me later," I replied.
"Huh?
No, you need to take this.
You forgot it the other day.
Here, take it..." she continued to argue with me about the balloon as I was in the midst of cleaning up the mess.
Stephani took the balloon from her and told her we would keep it "right here" (in the corner) until we were ready to leave.
That settled mom down for a few more minutes, until she came out once again to declare to all, "Well, it's my naptime now so I hope you all won't be real loud too." We all chuckled and dad gently said, "It's gonna be loud.
We have to fix this ceiling so it's going to be loud for a little while.
But you go lay down and rest." "Yeah it's time for my nap.
And thank you all you people who came to help me with all this," she added, waving her arm around the rubble.
Thank the heavens above that mom was not hurt that day.
It really could have been a lot worse.
I am counting my lucky stars that mom was not in the living room when the ceiling came crashing down.
I don't want to think about the outcome had she been caught underneath that...with no caregiver there to help her!
Thank goodness I called her that morning.
I am so grateful to the friends and family who dropped what they were doing to come over right away and help out in mom's severe emergency!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 11, 2013>
Mom has been asking me for weeks now to take her JC Penney.
She wants to buy my little guy an outfit for his birthday.
I think the real motive for wanting to go to the mall was to stock up on some more Bath & Body Works lotions and sprays.
Mom has an obsession with those bath gels and lotions.
Her bathroom cabinet is FULL of them...seriously.
FULL.
There is no room for any more.
It's been somewhat of pain for my dad as mom keeps stock piling more and more body products that have taken over not only all of the cabinet space, but now the counter as well.
The last time we all went to the mall together (about a month ago), mom tried to sneak off to buy more body products.
Dad caught her though, and she didn't make her getaway to Bath & Body Works fast enough.
She's been scheming to get there ever since.
Dad eventually told her that she could buy some more of her "favorite kinds" of bath stuff if she agreed to get rid of some of the old stuff.
Whether she understood that part of the deal or not, what she heard was that she was allowed to get some body gels!
Due to sick kids (and sick self), I haven't been over to mom's house the past 2 Mondays.
I decided I'd make it up to her and take her out on a week night.
I wasn't sure if she would resist, since she has a very strict routine of bed between 8 and 8:30.
But she really wanted that body stuff, so she agreed to go after dinner last night.
My dad brought her over shortly after 6:00 pm.
No sooner than he stopped his truck did mom excitedly hop out, with a huge grin on her face, ear to ear.
"I'm so happy, thank you for taking me and I have my bag here too for that store, what do you think I should do first?
Should I go to pick out your son a toy or clothes or should I go upstairs first and go to that Bath store or you could look for something and I'll go upstairs and then I'll come back to you..." On and on she went for the next 15 minutes in the car, incessantly chattering about how happy she was, how good it is for her to get out and shop (she used to go places all the time when she was a driver), asking what order we should run our errands in, and occassionally talking about memories of her childhood as we drove past memorable landmarks.
I could hardly get a word in edgewise and if I did, she didn't seem to register what I was saying.
But I was content to let her ramble; I was just glad that she was happy.
We pulled into the parking lot and mom, in her usual fashion, took off out of the car, racing upstairs to Bath & Body Works as if she was running a marathon!
At one point I told her she was walking too fast and asked her to slow down.
She responded with, "No I'm okay.
It's really good exercise for me to walk like this too."
After practically sprinting past all who stood between us and the store, we reached mom's destination.
Each time she goes to Bath & Body Works, she brings her own bag from home-one that she has saved from the store a long time ago.
I tried explaining that they will give her a new bag each time and she didn't need to save it, but she really wanted that bag.
Hey-it saves the environment, right?
;) Mom pulled out her list where she had written down the names of the scents that she loves.
A couple have been discontinued but she found the other two scents which were sitting next to each other on the shelves.
She held the shower gel and lotion in her hand, carefully studying the words on the label to be sure that was the item she needed.
She was a little confused between the bath gel and the shower gel, and I confirmed to her that it was the shower gel she wanted.
She didn't believe me and so she pulled out her glasses to read the label more carefully.
She became confused when it came time to pick out the body spray.
An associate who worked at the store came over to check on us.
Mom wasn't responding to her offer to help, so I explained to the nice woman that mom was looking for the body spray.
She explained to me that the packaging had changed but what mom held in her hands was indeed the body spray.
I tried explaining this concept to mom.
She wasn't catching on.
"Why does this say Bath & Body Works here too?
That makes it sound like it's for the bath."
"Mom, that's the name of the store.
See, it's on every bottle.
They write the name of the store on every bottle, but this here says that it is body spray," I explained as I pointed to the labels on every bottle.
After a couple more minutes of persausion and studying labels, mom finally concluded that she had selected the right products.
Whew, I thought.
We're done!
Not quite!
Mom had only selected one of her favorite scents and she needed to choose her very favorite scent next: Warm Vanilla Sugar.
On and on we went again, sorting through lotions, bath and shower gels and body sprays.
When she found exactly what she was looking for, she placed 3 of everything in her bag.
"Mom, I don't think you need 3 sets.
That's a lot of money you're going to be spending," I said, suggesting that she buy only one complete set of the Warm Vanilla Sugar.
"No this is really good and I need it too.
I use it so much and yes I need this too and I got this gift in the mail too," she argued, waving a 20% off coupon in front of my face.
We made our way to the front counter and mom took all of her loot out from the bag.
In total, she had 4 shower gels, 4 body sprays, 5 lotions (one was a free gift for buying so much) and a travel sized lotion (which was a gift as well).
I was becoming increasingly anxious at this point because I knew my dad was not going to be thrilled with the amount of unnecessary body products she was buying.
And I was wondering how she was going to pay for all of this.
She pulled out her coin bag and I saw a stack of $1 bills and one $5 bill.
"How much money do you have there mom?"
I asked.
"It doesn't look like it's going to be enough for all of this."
Mom very slowly counted her money, one-dollar bill at a time.
She had $27.
The grand total of her purchase, with her coupon, was $86.
"Mom, look at everything you have on the counter.
You have more than 12 bottles here.
Do you think $27 is going to be enough?"
Mom dumped some change into her hand.
"Tell me how much that is and then add this," she instructed the sale associate.
"I have that other card too," she told me, referring to her credit card (which I wasn't certain dad wanted her to use).
I felt a little panicky; I wasn't quite sure how to handle the situation.
I called dad, who (as suspected) was not thrilled about her attempted purchase.
He told me to try and get her to put some back, but "if she makes a scene about it then let her get it and we'll deal with it later."
Deal with it later: this means that mom won't be allowed to go to Bath & Body Works for a long time.
Dad thinks that she has to learn to do what we tell her to or else there are consequences.
This is the perfect approach for a child.
And since mom is very childlike, it seems logical.
Unfortunately, mom is not teachable with this disease.
I told my dad (later on that night) that the best approach is to limit her access to the money.
The cards need to be taken away and she needs a cash allowance.
It's complicated; it's not as simple as it sounds.
Back to the counter: I tried to coax mom into putting some of the Warm Vanilla Sugar sets back.
The sale associate (who was wise to the situation) told mom that she would hold it for her until she came back "next time."
I told her it would be there for a long time, why not come back and get it when she runs out of it?
No amount of convincing would do for mom.
"No, I can get all this.
I need this, no."
Then she turned her face from me and glared at me from the corner of her eye, adding, "You guys need to just quit picking on me!"
as she pushed all of the products forward to the associate.
I stood by and let mom move forward with the purchase, swallowing the lump in my throat.
How did we get to this point?
It just doesn't make sense that I would have to stand by and watch my mom-a grown woman, the woman who raised me and taught me all I know-struggle with a seemingly simple concept such as how much money it takes to buy an item (or 12).
It is hard to reverse the roles and have to act like a mom to my own mother.
And even harder because somewhere deep down she senses what is going on and feels like I am disrespecting her.
It breaks my heart.
After paying for her abundance of body products, mom swiftly led the way out of the store and back down to JC Penney.
She wandered around the kid's sections; I'm not exactly sure what she was looking for.
But it was obvious that she wanted me to select something for her to buy for my son.
I chose an outfit and we were on our way.
I wanted to go to the Children's Place to buy my boys some much-needed summer clothes.
But mom became anxious at the mere suggestion and took her phone out of her purse to check the time.
"It's already getting so late, oh my gosh it's already 7:30.
I need to be home.
It's not good for me to be out so late and I have to be back by 8:00 for getting ready for bed and other things too."
[By other things, she means medicine time].
I knew it was a battle I would surely lose, so instead of shopping for my boys, we made our way to the car.
I decided I could go shopping another time; it was more important to end the evening on a good note.
And mom was happy.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 8, 2013>
Happy Monday!
I hope you all had a great Easter holiday.
My twin brother and his family came to visit and were so kind to leave us a present: the stomach flu.
I, and my kids, have been battling the bug since Easter night.
It started with me and every 48 hours someone else in the household catches it...I feel like it's NEVER GONNA END!!!!!
Needless to say, I have been consumed taking care of myself and my kids and I haven't been over to my mom's.
I definitely don't want her catching what we all have...she would absolutely think she is dying!
Strange to say, but I'm feeling a little bit of withdrawals from not going over to help mom.
She has been wanting me to take her to the mall.
She has $4 left on her JC Penney gift card and it is burning a hole in her pocket!!
She wants me to take her to pick out some clothes for my birthday boy, who will be 2 this Saturday.
I was actually looking forward to taking her today and regretted having to call her to cancel.
Surprisingly, she seemed to understand why I had to cancel (I was dreading the phone call due to her lack of comprehension).
I suppose it is because I talked to her a couple of times last week already when the rest of us were puking.
Hopefully everyone will be well tomorrow and I can take her on her shopping spree then!
Last week, I called to check in with her on Wednesday.
She told me how "that girl" (aka caretaker Teresa) took her to walk up the street to the Dollar Tree where she stocked up on birthday cards for the grandkids.
She also described to me what she had gotten for Ryder's upcoming birthday.
"I got him one of those things that's round and it goes up-it says 'Happy Birthday' on it-it goes up in the air, one of those things."
If you guessed balloon then your guess was as good as mine.
As it turns out Ryder LOVES balloons and wants me to give him one every single time we go into that darn Dollar Tree!
I assured mom he would be very happy with his gift.
Just another quick update here: after my post about mom refusing to let in the caregiver, and a repeat of that when my Aunt and Uncle went over a few days later, my dad went out and bought a lock box!
We now have a secret code that will access the caregivers to a house key.
No more phone calls from caregivers who are stranded outside the house for half an hour or more before mom will open the door!
More blogging to come...have a great week!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 25, 2013>
This week my kids are off school for Spring Break.
I hate to admit this, but I seriously thought about cancelling my Monday at mom's.
I have 5 days to spend with the kids, and I want to make it count.
After much thought, I realized that the best way to make it count would be to go to mom's house and take the kids with me...and put them to work!
More than ever, I feel like it is SO important to be there for each other as a family.
When one is in need, we need to be there to help ease the burden.
All for one, one for all.
I was expecting a bit of a fit from the teenagers.
I know they have other things they want to do with their time off other than go to grandma's house to work.
Much to my pleasant surprise, they didn't complain at all!
They seemed content to go over for a few hours and help out with some chores around the house.
The little kids, however, weren't as easygoing.
After some initial complaining, they finally got to work sweeping the floors, folding blankets, organizing the bookshelf, and making  some piles of laundry.
They lasted for about 15 minutes...baby steps!
Sorry for the lousy pictures, I'm still learning how to use this new camera!!
Meanwhile, the "big" girls and I worked on some of my ongoing projects.
Amber helped me organize the years of family vacation pictures into photo albums, Maurina helped reorganize the food pantry and cleaned out the aquarium (whose tenants have been relocated).
I worked on cleaning the back room and am pretty darn proud of myself for my accomplishment: I was able to get all of the clutter off of the air hockey table!!!
This was no small task (I even had to haul some stuff up to the attic) ;) I should have taken a "before" picture.
We spent all morning working on our cleaning/organization projects and left shortly before mom's naptime, because I knew she'd have a conniption fit if I stayed there with all 5 kids during her nap!
I'm glad that I didn't give into the temptation to call my day off.
It's hard to give up time to do something for other people, especially for kids.
I'm hoping to lead by example and help them to recognize the good feelings that come by helping others.
I would like to think that the girls felt good about the service they were able to give to their grandparents.
We've even discussed (the big girls and I) about coming on Mondays during the summer to help with more projects (dad has a lot of organizing projects to tackle!
Lol).
I think it was the perfect way to kick off our Spring Break!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, March 22, 2013>
The inevitable day has come.
I have been waiting for this to happen.
In the middle of my volunteer time in my daughter's 2nd grade classroom this morning, I got a phone call from Teresa (mom's new caregiver).
"Your mom left a note on the door," she explained to me, reading the note.
In case you can't read it, mom wrote: "Girls- Te + Ch" [Teresa and Christina...she can only remember the beginning sounds of their names] "I am not here so I cant answer door so you should leave I wont be back until later about 11:00 or 11:30.
Deana" Right away I knew it was only a ploy to get Teresa to leave.
She doesn't ever leave the house earlier than 10:30 (and if she does it is like pulling out teeth that aren't even loose yet).
I knew she was locked away in her room.
Teresa asked for the home number and told me she would try to call and see if she'd pick up the phone.
I knew there was no chance of that happening, so after giving Teresa the number and hanging up, I texted my dad to see if he could call and get her to open the door.
(All of this is happening while I'm trying to read one-on-one with a classmate of Aubrey's, mind you).
Dad texted me back a few minutes later to inform me that mom was refusing to answer the door.
She had just gotten out of the shower and didn't want anyone there until she was dressed and with her full face of make-up on (which would be about 10:30).
What choice did I have?
I gave my apologies to Aubrey's teacher and drove the 5 minutes to my mom's house, where Teresa sat outside, waiting to be let in.
Once inside, we went through our usual routine: me, knocking on mom's locked bedroom door as mom stood on the other side quiet as a mouse, unresponsive.
"Mom, I know you're in there.
Dad told me he talked to you on the phone, I know you're home.
Please answer me."
Finally an answer, "I'm naked.
I only just have my pants on, I'm putting on my make-up."
Reluctantly, she cracked her door open and warned me that I might see her boobs.
I closed my eyes as I let myself in her room, turning my back towards her so as to not see her in the nude.
[On a total tangent, when I was growing up, I was always very shy but in contrast, my mom never cared about my sister or I seeing her naked.
When we'd accidentally walk in on her after a shower or something, we would often get embarassed and she'd always say "oh please, I'm your mother".]
Mom held a shirt in front of her chest and went back to her counter to finish applying her make-up.
"Mom, you have to open the door when Teresa is ringing the doorbell.
It is her job to be here," I tried explaining, knowing she would grasp little of what I was trying say.
"No, I already told your dad no.
I don't want people in my house when I'm not out there.
They always come so early before I'm even ready, they can't be here that early."
"10:00 isn't early mom.
Maybe you can leave the door unlocked next time so she can let herself in," I suggested.
Mom got a little smirk on her face and suddenly dropped her shirt for a brief second.
"See, my old boob," she snickered, obviously not listening to anything I just said.
"Mom.
When Teresa comes, you need to let her in," I said, trying to keep a straight face and ignore her silliness.
"She'll be okay until you're ready.
She's here to help.
She can do some dishes or something while you're getting ready."
I repeated my words over and over, trying to get her to focus on what I was saying.
She would interrupt me with random thoughts, "It's so weird how my back here is so sweaty, see.
And my body gets real wet, here, under here too," she said, lifting up her arms and grabbing at her armpits.
Eventually, she replied with, "No.
I don't want people here in my house when I'm not there and then people will steal from me.
Even though I told her the other day she's nice, but I don't want her here when I'm not out there."
We went back and forth for a few more minutes.
I assured her that Teresa would not steal from her; she was there to help and it was her job which she would be fired from if she stole.
Mom instructed me to go stay with her until she was ready.
I eventually told mom I had to leave.
I walked back out to the kitchen, where Teresa was washing a few dishes.
I kind of explained mom's "logic" behind her note and Teresa was very sympathetic and understanding to mom's feelings.
We talked a few more minutes until mom finally came out, empty Slim Fast cup in hand to put in the sink (this is her routine when she comes out of her cave...I mean, room).
"Hi Deana," Teresa said cheerfully.
"Oh hi, sorry about my note but I was just in the shower and getting ready," mom said sheepishly.
"It's okay, you look so pretty today!
Your make-up looks really pretty," Teresa said to mom.
After small talk was being made, I said my good-byes to mom and Teresa and left.
I knew this would eventually happen.
The tricky part now is figuring out how to resolve this so that I don't have to leave in the middle of volunteering-or anything else for that matter!-to let in mom's caregivers. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 19, 2013>
A couple of months ago, I began thinking about activities that I could do with my mom that would be meaningful and even stimulating for her.
I came upon a set of books geared towards people with Alzheimer's and Dementia.
The idea of these books is to provide activities for and improve communication with people who suffer from dementia.
There are several different books to choose from, and I decided to give it a try and ordered the America book (as shown below).
I chose this book with the idea that looking at the pictures from landmarks of America would spark some memory in mom and create some dialogue for us aside from the everyday topics of medications and aches and pains.
Mom always loved to travel and had visited many of the places that were pictured in the book, so I figured this would be a good choice.
Throughout each book, there are beautifully photographed pictures on one page and on the corresponding page there are interesting facts about the pictures, quotations, questions, etc.
What I liked best about the book was that at the beginning of the book, there are guidelines to help you interact with the dementia person.
They give helpful hints about communication, such as making eye contact when you talk, getting on their level, etc.
They also give some great ideas on how to create dialogue by asking thought provoking questions and provide examples of such.
I was very optimistic and enthusiastic about taking my new book over to mom and looking through it together.
"Mom, I got you something," I said, inviting her over to sit down next to me on the couch.
After some coaxing to get her to sit next to me, I explained that I got a book for her that I'd like to look at together.
I told her it had pictures of different places that she had visited and that I was excited to hear about her stories of those places.
I opened it up to a page I knew she would remember.
"Do you remember when you went to New York and saw the Statue of Liberty?"
I asked, pointing to the large statue of Lady Liberty.
Mom squinted her eyes and looked confused.
"No, I don't know about that."
As I continued to explain New York, reminding her about the trip they had taken several years ago, and talked about the Statue of Liberty, something finally sparked in mom.
"We went to New York, yeah.
What good thing we got to see was that place, that religious place [Palmyra], and that airplane place where people were killing people too but it was closed down too," she said, referring to Ground Zero (their trip to New York was right after 911 took place).
She talked of some memories of New York but when asked again if she recognized the statue she gave me a blank look and sort of shook her head.
I turned to the next page: The Grand Canyon.
This was the first big family vacation I remember taking as a child-to the Grand Canyon and up through Zion and Utah.
Mom did not recognized the picture on the page, but eventually after describing what and where the Grand Canyon was, she brought up memories of visiting there with her older brother as a child.
"I don't recall taking you to Arizona.
Trying to remember where Arizona is.
My brother took me as a kid, my brother Mike took me too and we took a fun thing too and that, that ani-animal place thing too, there's one in Utah too.
Am I correct in saying animal?"
I struggled to understand exactly what she was talking about, but finally figured that she must be talking about a dinosaur park (there's a dinosaur museum in Utah that she talks about every so often, which she visited on a vacation with my sister's family).
And she must have taken some sort of ride around the park on a train or something.
(I'm sure my Uncle will help recall this memory in the comment section ;) I was a little sad that she couldn't remember taking her children here on vacation.
It seems that the earliest memories are the ones she remembers the most clearly.
A few years ago, mom and dad went on another vacation to New York and visited Niagara Falls.
My brother and his girlfriend at the time (now wife) met up with them and it was mom's first time meeting Natalie.
It was a vacation that she absolutely loved and Niagara Falls was a place she had always wanted to go and see.
I thought for sure she would remember the picture of the beautiful cascading waterfall.
"It says Canada," she said, reading the caption on the next page over.
"I don't know about Canada."
Try as I might, mom could not recall Niagara Falls.
It was apparent, at this point, that mom's attention was dwindling.
Between each page, she would try to change the subject to her doctor or her medication but each time, I tried to bring her back to focus.
I was determined to talk about something else and maybe, just maybe, find some kind of connection with my mom again.
Turning to the page of San Francisco's Golden Gate Bridge, mom says, "Where is San Francisco?"
I explained to her that it was up north, near San Jose which was where we went EVERY SINGLE Easter of my childhood to visit my Aunt and cousins for the holiday.
Eventually, mom remarks, "Oh, I went many years ago, we went to a bridge thing too and that's when I could still be a driver.
I'm still young enough to be a driver."
And with that, mom became side tracked and went on her rant about driving.
I tried to reel her back in and showed her the picture of Mt.
Rushmore, explaning the history behind it.
Mom abruptly stood up, walked over to a box of tissues, wiping her nose, and said, "Hmph.
Wonder why my nose is bleeding so red."
(On a side note, I did not see any red blood at all).
I tried again to bring her back over to finish looking at the book.
But mom walked right past me as if I wasn't even there and walked out the front door, mumbling something about the mail being there.
After a couple of minutes, she came back in sat down beside me to sort through her mail.
She glanced over at me, and the book on my lap, gave me a glare and snapped, "I don't care to look at that stuff."
She got up and walked away to her computer.
I was a little bit disappointed that more of a connection and dialogue wasn't made with mom, especially because these books are geared towards people with dementia.
However...there are a couple of things I realized during that session.
#1.
However slight it was, mom DID remember some things and was able to (somewhat) communicate her memories.
#2.
Mom's form of dementia is very different from Alzheimer's.
It is, in fact, one of the rarest forms of dementia out there.
I am sure these books are great for people with other forms of dementia, but with mom's form her semantic memory is affected.
This type of memory is responsible for giving meanings to what symbols (visual) and words (auditory) represent.
She is unable to identify memories of specific places simply by telling her the name of the place or showing her a picture.
We have to dig a little deeper to reach those memories.
Perhaps taking a different approach would be helpful the next time around in showing her a book.
Rather than making memories the focus, I will simply talk about the beauty of the pictures and try to get some dialogue on what she thinks or how she feels about it.
For my readers who have a loved one with dementia, you can find these books on Amazon.
I am very curious to hear about others' experiences with these books.
So if you do decide to order, let me know how it goes ;) I've attached the direct links here:  You can also visit the companies website directly: http://www.shadowboxpress.com/index.html#
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 18, 2013>
Happy Monday everyone!
I've been away for the past week...my computer had a virus.
Ugh!
Finally got it all worked out.
Last week was mom's second week with a caregiver.
She had Teresa come in on Wednesday and a new lady, I think her name was Christina, came in on Friday.
I didn't meet Christina, it was kind of a last minute notification that they were sending someone out that morning.
So my sister (also named Christina) met her that morning.
I was a little concerned that mom would not open the door for Teresa on Wednesday morning.
So I called Teresa that morning to let her know that if mom did not answer she should give me a call and I would come over to let her in.
I never received a call; I took that as a good sign that mom had opened the door.
I called mom later on in the day to see how it went with Teresa.
After telling me, yet again, how she felt about having people over at her house with her ("I told your dad 'no' but he still said she had to come, I don't know why she needs to be here..."), mom finally perked up as she told me how "that girl" went for a walk with her.
"She really wanted to go for a walk too, but I don't know why she couldn't drive me so she walked with me to Kmart too and I got some of that really good laundry soap stuff too.
And she says she visits other people too, that's her job, visiting people," she says, with amazement and awe in her voice.
I asked her some more questions about their visit and overall, mom seemed cheery about the whole experience.
"She helped with some of your dad's laundry too and wash a couple dishes too...she's a nice girl too..." mom continued.
Aside from the fact that mom just plain doesn't want anyone over there, she seems to do well while they are there.
She gets aggravated when people are around, I think because she feels like she can't do her own thing (like run and hide in the office to play computer games, or nap in complete and utter peace and quiet), but I think deep down she likes having people there to visit with.
On Friday, I asked mom how she liked the new caregiver who came that day.
Mom was elated to tell me that Christina let her make her her favorite sandwich: sliced turkey, American sliced cheese, sliced tomato, all layered on potato bread and smothered in mayo, mustard and submarine dressing.
Mom always asks me I would like to have one her famous sandwiches because "it's so delicious and nutritious for my body."
Well, mom was finally able to bond-this time with Christina-over their delicious sandwiches.
Today was my day to spend with mom.
I've been trying to help my dad with some organization projects while I'm there, and mom is becoming increasingly resentful towards me for staying during her naptime.
I feel like I'm pretty quiet, as are my boys (one naps and the other settles in with a movie during naptime), but if we are breathing then we are too loud for mom.
She is fine during the rest of our visit, but the past couple of weeks (especially last week) she was very cranky with me when I left.
"I don't want you people here anymore!
You don't support me and you're too noisy while I'm trying to sleep!
You don't need to be here, no!"
I know better than to get offended; sometimes I question if I should really stay during her nap.
But then I remind myself that I cannot give in to my toddler when he throws tantrums; it's no different for mom.
Similarly, I sometimes wonder if we're jumping the gun and pushing a caregiver on her before there's a real need for it.
But with the safety concerns we've had, I know that there's no better time to get started than the present.
It helps relieve some stress and worry off my dad as well, both to have someone there to supervise mom as well as having people there to help with the housekeeping.
She has been getting used to having people there, little by little, over the past several months.
She may throw tantrums about it, but hopefully someday the tantrums will subside! 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, March 8, 2013>
Nobody loves her children the way a mother does.
When a child wins a special award, or has exciting news to share, who is their biggest cheerleader?
Mom.
When a child is hurt or sad, whose heart breaks the most with them?
Mom.
Who is the person who loses sleep at night, either caring for a newborn baby or waiting up past curfew?
Mom.
Who knows their strengths and weaknesses and loves them unconditionally; when a child is being bratty or naughy, who loves them despite it all??
Mom.
I've been reflecting on this a lot over the past couple of days.
When my 7 year old rears her unpleasant attitude, stomping up the stairs while yelling snotty remarks and slamming her bedroom door, anyone else might say she's a brat.
But I am her mom.
I know her ins and outs.
She might be a crank sometimes, but I also know she's a spunky, bright, compassionate, and loving little girl.
When my boys are coloring the toilet seats with my favorite lipstick, pulling the toilet paper off their rolls or smashing goldfish crackers in the carpet, some might call them troublemakers.
But I am mom.
I know that they are curious, imaginative and full of life!
When my teenagers argue with the rules or get attitude with me because I'm not giving into their wants, some may want to give them a good backhand!
But I am mom.
I know that they are exerting their independence and discovering who they are.
And I love them still.
Nobody is more excited, happy, disappointed, worried, concerned, hopeful or full of love for my kids than I am.
Nobody can love her children the way a mother does.
For me, that one person who loved me most is now gone.
Gone is my cheerleader, my confidant, my shoulder to cry on.
I try no to dwell on it too much.
I try to focus on the positive and remember my mom the way she was.
I am fortunate to have a small group of close friends and a couple of Aunts who are there for me to vent to, cry to and share my joys with.
One Aunt, in particular, calls me every week just to see how I'm doing.
When she knows I'm having a bad week, she will send me cards or even gifts.
I'm lucky to have that kind of support in my life.
Still, I miss my mom, particularly when life gets rough.
February was a tragic month for me and for my family in general.
I won't go into details of the events of the month, but it has been one of the most emotionally trying times requiring me to witness and do some of the hardest things I've ever had to do.
It's times such as these that I miss my mom the most.
She would've had just the right words to say.
She would have been there to hug me and comfort me and hold my hand through everything-and not just for me, but for everyone.
And so, as I work through my grief and pain and disappointments in life, I miss my mom.
I don't think that ache in my heart will ever go away.
But I do also count the many blessings I have.
I am lucky to have an extremely supportive husband, who encourages me and loves me despite all my weaknesses.
I am lucky to have one of the most awesome dads on the face of this Earth.
I am lucky to have great family members and friends who are there for me, to bring me dinners in those times of tragedies, to help with my kids, to lend a listening ear when I need it, to get me out for a girl's night when I need it most and to be excited with me when something good happens.
And most of all, I am lucky to be a mom and to have these beautiful children to give my unconditional love to.
I realize now more than ever how much I need to be there for them, especially when they feel they have nowhere else to turn.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 6, 2013>
Over the past several months I have been in contact with the Alzheimer's Association.
I have only good things to say about them.
In this difficult journey, they were one of the few people that we have come across that I have felt really care about our situation and are trying to help us find some relief to our dilemmas.
I had called them several months ago about resources for support groups in my area.
About a month later, a woman called me back just to check in and see if the resources they gave were helpful.
As we talked more, the issue came up about our dilemma with a caregiver.
We were having some concerns about mom being left alone all day long and the main issue with hiring a caregiver is the cost.
After a couple months of working with us, including a home evaluation, it was determined that we are eligible to receive some assistance with a program they have for respite care.
It's only for a couple of months (and then I suppose we'll have another evaluation to see if we can stay on the program) and it only offers 30 hours a month, but that is perfect for our needs at this time.
As it is, I go over on Mondays, my Aunt and Uncle go over on Tuesdays, and another Aunt goes over on Thursdays.
This leaves Wednesdays and Friday open for mom to cause trouble with nobody around ;) Today was our first day with a caregiver.
Teresa is scheduled to come for a few hours on Wednesdays-mostly to supervise and make sure mom is safe.
She will also do some light cleaning and cooking if we need her to.
My dad tried explaining the idea of a caregiver to mom.
She, as expected, was very resistant.
"No, I don't need anyone over here, no.
I don't know why you want anyone here, no.
I'm fine, I don't need help."
Dad asked if I would be available to go over this morning to be there when the new caregiver arrived and help mom settle in to her new routine.
I told him of course, I would be there.
I arrived to mom's house a little before 10:00 am to talk to mom and remind her what was going on for the day.
As usual, when I got there mom was locked away in her room.
I knocked on her bedroom door and she didn't respond.
I put my ear to the door and heard the shower running, so I gave her a few minutes to finish getting cleaned up.
Just before 10:00 am, Teresa (the caregiver) rang the bell and she came inside the house as we made introductions.
I liked her right away-and not just because she's Portuguese (turns out her mom has the same maiden name as mine...I knew it as soon as she pronounced our family name in the proper Portuguese language, which nobody has ever done before!
We connected instantly ;)) Right away I could tell that she was a kind and caring person, as I was further able to see in her interaction with mom.
After talking for a few minutes with Teresa and giving her some background on mom, I excused myself to go check on my mom.
I walked down the hall and knocked on her door.
No answer.
I knocked several times and called her name loudly.
Still no answer.
After several minutes of this, I decided I should get the bedroom key and make sure that she was okay in there.
I fumbled through a set of keys, trying each one until finally one key unlocked the door.
I turned the knob and called mom's name as I went in, announcing my entry into her bedroom.
I found her poking her head out of the wooden, sliding bathroom door, towel wrapped around her hair, as she stared at me.
"What?
Don't come here, I'm naked.
Do you want to see my weird, different body?"
she said, emerging from the bathroom, wrapped in a towel.
"It's okay, I'm not looking mom," I said, turning my direction away from her so that she would know I was NOT interested in seeing her in the nude.
"I just wanted to let you know that someone is here to see you," I told her.
"Oh I wanted to show you something too..." Mom rushed over to her bathroom counter and pulled out 2 boxes of Revlon hair dye.
She wanted to know if the 2 colors she picked out were okay; Friday is hair dyeing day because it has to be done exactly every 8 weeks.
Despite my efforts to talk to her about Teresa, mom was focused only on the hair dye and wasn't hearing a word I had to say.
Finally, after about 5 minutes of rambling, I was able to get her attention.
She narrowed her eyes at me and her demeanor changed instantly when she figured out what I was trying to say.
"No, I already told your dad last night, no.
I don't want anybody over here.
I don't understand why he thinks I need someone here, no.
Tell her no.
No."
"Mom, she's already here, she's not leaving yet.
She's not leaving until 1:00."
She continued to object, "No.
I'm not even ready for anything, no.
I have other things to do too," she argued, trying to make herself seem busy as she picked a few things up off her bed.
After a few minutes going back and forth, I finally told her, "Mom, she is here now.
Finish getting ready; do your hair and make-up and then come out and meet her and see what you think."
And with that, I walked out of her room and left her to finish readying herself.
About 20 minutes later, I heard her footsteps coming down the hall.
She practically glared at Teresa, as Teresa said "hi" in a friendly voice and introduced herself.
She held out her hand to shake mom's as mom stood there; she did not return the handshake.
"I already told my husband I don't need anybody over here.
I don't know why you're here, I don't want anyone here.
I like to be by myself sometimes in the day too," she protested.
Without skipping a beat, Teresa said,  "Your hair looks so pretty.
You look really nice, did you just finish your hair?"
Mom's frown quickly turned to a smile as she realized the compliment Teresa had given her.
"Oh, yeah.
But I'm going to dye it on Friday," she said, glancing at herself in the mirror which hung right above the seat on the couch where Teresa sat.
The two talked for a few minutes; Teresa asking her some questions and mom talking about whatever subject was on her mind, mostly about how funny and weird she looks now and how she used to think she was "such a cuter young girl".
We got up and followed mom into the kitchen and Teresa asked her if she could make her something to eat.
I quickly filled Teresa in on her eating schedule-mom wouldn't be ready to eat until 12:00.
For the next hour, I stood by as Teresa and mom became familiar with one another.
Mom talked about her usual topics; Teresa doesn't know any better (for now) and just listened with great interest.
After Teresa complimented a picture of mom's parents, which was sitting atop an end table, mom took that as a cue and led Teresa down the hall to show her more pictures of her family.
In no time, she was talking about her relatives who were Mormon pioneers.
I was in the living room, but heard Teresa remark, "My sister-in-law is Mormon."
Mom didn't seem to hear.
I rushed over to her, knowing a friendship was about to be forged, and tried to redirect mom's attention to what Teresa had just said.
"Mom, did you hear what she said?
She said her sister-in-law is Mormon."
I repeated this a few times, standing directly in front of mom's face and making eye contact.
She finally caught on to my words and became excited at what I said.
A connection had been made!
"It's really such a really good religion and there's such really good people there too.
It's one of the best religions too and I was wondering if you would ever wanna be baptized too?"
she asked her at one point during the conversation.
I stood by, shaking my head and laughing.
Teresa was a great sport and did very well conversing with mom.
After about an hour, I could see that mom was settling in and starting to feel more comfortable with Teresa.
I figured, at that point, that it would be okay for me leave.
Teresa reassured me that they would be fine and mom seemed fine with me leaving as well.
I told her I loved her and that I would see her later.
I called my mom later this afternoon, just as my dad had gotten home and asked mom about the day's events.
I asked him how she felt about Teresa and he said that mom was quick to let him know that she doesn't need her there every week.
She wants time to be alone and do her own thing (probably to play on the computer without someone looking over her shoulder) and she doesn't understand why she has to be there.
I'm wondering how it went after I left (I suppose I'd have to call Teresa to find out the truth about that!)
I envision my mom telling her that it's time for her to go because it's her naptime and not to bother coming back.
Sorry mom, but I think Teresa's gonna be around for a while ;)
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 3, 2013>
As you many have read from my post last Thursday, my parents just celebrated their 32nd wedding anniversary.
My dad wrote a very heartfelt tribute for the occassion, found here, about their journey together over the years.
They celebrated their special day by going out to dinner.
I'll give you one guess as to which restaurant they went to.
For those avid followers of my blog, you've probably guessed by now: Outback Steakhouse (if you guessed Miguels you were close...but Outback is for a more celebratory occassion).
Sadly, mom is having trouble remembering the name of her favorite restaurant these days.
But dad knew where she'd want to go before she even asked him to "take me to that really good place I like, that one that has that meat."
A couple of days before their anniversary, I came home from dropping off kids at school to find a message on my machine.
"Oh, it's mom and I wanted you to take me to the Dollar Tree place cuz they have cards and things there too and I want to go for-to get a card for your dad."
When I heard the message, I knew I wouldn't be able to work on her timeline to take her (which would be at that very moment) so I put off calling her back.
I figured I would call her later in the day when I was ready to go that direction to the grocery store.
Mom beat me to the punch and called me again shortly after 3:00, just as I was getting ready to head out the door.
"Cassandra, did you get my message??
I really need to go to the Dollar Tree so please can you take me sometime?"
"As a matter of fact I am going out the door right now to the grocery store.
I can pick you up now and take you," I responded (a couple of times).
Finally, she replied emphatically, "What?
You mean you can take me right now?
Oh good!
Let me just go put on my bra and I can go.
Yeah.
Oh good!"
I hung up the phone, laughing of course.
I drove the mile down the road to mom's house and as I pulled in the driveway, I could see her waiting for me on the couch, peering out the window in anticipation (this is our normal routine whenever I pick her up to go somewhere).
She closed the blinds and came out the front door.
As she practically skipped down the driveway, wind blowing her bangs back, she had a huge grin on her face, ear to ear.
You would've thought I was taking her Disneyland.
"Oh I'm so glad you're able to take me dear, thank you so much for taking me.
They have such really good cards at the Dollar Tree..." she talked my ear off for the next minute and a half that it took to arrive to the Dollar Tree, telling me about all the cards she needed to get and what a great price they were there.
She insisted that I drop her off and begin my shopping at the grocery store, located next door to the Dollar Tree.
I am always a little hesistant about leaving her alone in a store; mostly because I'm afraid that she won't be able to communicate with others if needs be and that people will look at her strangely or treat her badly for her odd behavior.
But since she was only going for the card, and I was right next door, I figured it would be okay.
In no time, I saw her briskly walking down the aisle of the grocery store where I was selecting my pasta for the evening's meal.
"See what I got?
This one that says this, 'you're my husband and my best friend'", she said proudly, showing me the card she had selected.
"That one is perfect mom," I said.
We continued around the store, mom grabbing a bag of fritos for herself as I finished my shopping trip.
For once, she wasn't rushing me or asking me when I was ready to go (okay...take that back, she did ask one time if I was almost done).
But she seemed content to walk with me as I finished my chore.
On the drive home, she thanked for me taking her to the Dollar Tree and urged me not to say a word about it to my dad.
"I'm gonna surprise him with this too so I don't want him to know I got it so don't tell him that you took me, okay Dear?"
she said with a childlike innocence that brought a tear to my eye.
It was clear that this card for my dad meant a lot to her.
And in her mind, it was going to mean a lot to my dad (and I'm sure it did...he's a simple guy to please!)
Happy Anniversary to my wonderful parents who have truly shown me what real love looks like.
I hope they both had a lovely evening and that mom enjoyed her delicious dinner at Outback Steakhouse.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, February 28, 2013>
Today's blog is a special one.
It was written by my dad, in honor of their 32nd anniversary which is today.
------------------------------------------------------------------- I met Deana Rae in early 1975, her dad was dating the woman next door, soon to be married.
I was attracted to the red hair and blue eyes.
It didn't take long to figure we were mutually attracted and soon after her 14th birthday she and her dad were full time neighbors.
We went steady on and off for the next few years.
Then one day, boom.
Fred and Edie were divorcing and Deana moved to Corona.
She was visiting often, but most times I was stoned or slightly drunk.
This didn't always make for meaningful visits.
She would bring her car over to be serviced, we would talk about days gone by.
One day she called shortly after my parents decided to divorce for the second time.
I had finally decided to stop drinking.
When I told Deana of this, she thought it was good.
When I told her I stopped smoking too she was over within the hour.
After a lengthy visit somehow the conversation changed to "after we're married...this-n-that..." Soon it was that we were to be married.
I was 20, she was 19.
We set the date 28 March 1981.
As fate would have it, I was laid off Friday the 13th of February.
On Valentine's Day we went on a double date with Gary and Janna to play in the snow up in Big Bear.
We talked about it and talked about it and finally decided 'to heck with a big wedding, why wait?'
So we decided to pitch the already purchased invitations and get married and start living.
So we did.
Two weeks later on Saturday the 28th of February we were married.
I was unemployed for about a month, then went through a few odd jobs before getting steady employment.
Just in time to find out in June that Deana was going to have twins.
At 8 months pregnant, she looked like a beach balloon on stilts.
We were blessed with Cassandra and Joe weighing in at 6 lbs 12 oz and 6 lbs 0 oz, respectively.
Life was good.
Two little monkeys kept each other company and kept us laughing.
Three years later, Christina was born, weighing in at 8 lbs.
7 oz.
We struggled, but those were some of the best times I remember.
Deana has always been shy, but friendly.
One day, her friend Nancy called and asked if I wanted a job working in tile.
Even my occupation I owe to my wife.
My mother-in-law, Beverley, was a fantastic cook.
She passed this skill down to her daughter.
She would visit often and she and Deana would cook and bake together.
It was absolutely great coming home to a nice home cooked meal, my favorite coconut cream pie.
Nobody could make a better coconut cream pie than Bev.
She passed this on to Deana who would always have one fresh baked pie for my birthday.
Deana was also very frugal.
She would make a dollar scream.
She did a tremendous job keeping the family finances.
Whenever we'd go to buy a new car or something, it made me feel 10 ft tall when the guy would comment on how good our credit was and he'd compliment Deana on a job well done.
I've learned recently, it's not that easy to balance everything and pay bills on time.
Although paying online is a big help.
For as long as I can remember, after we were married I called Deana Toots.
Every morning I kiss her good-bye and tell her "Have a good day Toots, love you."
One day she asked why I did this.
I told her so if anything happened to me and I didn't return the last thing she heard from me was "I love you".
When my Italian Grandma visited in 1985 she heard me call Deana "Toots".
She told me Grandpa always called her Toots.
Maybe in my youth it ingrained.
Besides being a great cook, baker, house cleaner and everything else, Deana was smart.
She had planned to go to work after all the kids were in school full-time.
She went to school in the evenings and eventually became a Head Start teacher.
She was very detail oriented.
She would plan things in such detail it drove me nuts just watching.
When she had parent conferences, the previous week was busy busy busy.
She would have lots of sticky notes on each child, then have to compile a lot of notes and paperwork together to prepare for these conferences.
The living room couch was filled with paperwork.
She'd be completely involved in this from 4:30 to 9:30 or 10:00 every night for the week.
She'd teach Sunday school and have the same detail oriented attitude.
Lots of prep, visual aides, treats she'd prepare for a couple of days for a one hour class.
Deana loves to travel.
She would come up with ideas for family vacations and we'd make them happen.
For our anniversary, however, we'd just go somewhere for the weekend.
No gifts, no problems.
Just the two of us for a few days, in either the mountains in a cabin or Catalina Island.
Just a peaceful, quiet weekend.
Usually I'd let her pick the location.
Always make the wife happy.
We would have disagreements, but one thing I learned is...never argue about money.
"It's only money-I'll make more."
However it's okay to ask for an accounting of where it went.
Sometimes Deana would get upset about asking where the money went.
It didn't help that I really loved to tease Deana.
Any chance I got I would tease her almost to the point of tears.
She was an easy mark.
Eventually after a few decades she finally would know when I was yanking her chain.
Toots is more than a best friend, a lover, a maid, an accountant-she's everything.
She even used to do the yard work.
No we don't have a big yard, but she was detailed.
Flower beds, grass manicured.
One day, two of my buddies were driving by; Dave said he took out his cell phone and took a picture of Toots doing the yard work to show his wife "a real woman".
One day I got injured on the job and received 8 stitches to the right wrist.
Deana was an excellent nurse.
She wanted to drive out to Orange County on a Friday afternoon and drive me home.
I refused to have her drive all that way, at that time of day.
She met me at the door and stayed by my side all weekend.
Even insisting on bathing me-not a bad deal.
All she needed was the uniform.
This year we'll celebrate 32 years of marital bliss.
Well mostly; the last few years have been somewhat difficult.
In 2010 Bev died suddenly from a fall.
Deana was very close to her mom.
The way she responded to this event was very unusual.
This is when I really knew the train was coming off the tracks.
Her stepdad had ALS and I was involved with taking care of him until he died 45 days after Bev.
Deana's attitude during this time was puzzling to me.
This was not the woman I've known all these years.
At Thanksgiving time the following year, I questioned her about dinner since Cassandra would be at her in-laws that year.
She didn't seem to understand so I told her not to worry about it, I'll take her to Denny's.
Now this should have gone over like a fart in church; like telling Babe Ruth he didn't know crap about baseball.
But on Wednesday night, when I asked "where's the turkey?"
her reply was, "You said you were taking me to that place for dinner."
Now I knew that the sub had sank and I actively went to doctor's appointments.
I'm pretty critical when I think negatively about someone or something.
Her nuerologist was a complete flake.
Met him one time and knew a second opinion was needed.
Finally I got the hook up with UCLA-it only took them 3 hours to give a diagnosis.
She'd seen "Dr. God" for 3 years and all he could tell me was, "It's not dementia and it's not Alzheimer's."
Yeah right.
Semantic Dementia is fairly rare according to Dr. Mendez.
The symptoms fit Deana to a tee.
March 7 2012.
Gone is the twinkle in her eye, her spunk, her ability to reason-to keep house-accounting-laundry-the woman I've known and loved for more than three decades is gone.
Left in her place, in her physical body is a person that is self-centered, fixated on medicine and her own schedule.
8:30 medicine, 10:30 medicine, 12:00 lunch, then nap, 2:30 medicine, 5:00 dinner, 8-8:30 bedtime.
It's almost like being with Rain Man.
Life now feels like Groundhog Day.
Everyday, hearing the same complaints, stories about how women change, how she thinks she looks different.
Not quite as bad as "50 First Dates" but getting close.
While she can tell you with exactness things 30 or 40 years ago, trying to reason with her or explaining what seems simple is like trying to teach her trigonometry.
I have to constantly remind myself it's not her fault, it's not the real Deana.
It's almost like having a 5 year old around.
My once very frugal wife now wants to spend, spend, spend.
No concept of money at all.
Our dreams of the future are just dust in the wind.
Once I was her love, she was my Queen.
Now she's still my Queen, but life is dramatically different.
Life is full of disappointments.
We may never hit the 50 year anniversary mark.
She may not remember me 5 years from now.
Live for today, Deana still knows who I am.
My job is to make her happy, happy, happy.
Not an easy task.
Sometimes it wears on oneself.
But in this game that we call life, no one said it's fair.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 25, 2013>
Lately my mom has been a little obsessed with her clothes matching.
She's become a little bit too matchey-matchey, in fact.
The other day I walked into her room, to find her in her usual position sitting on her bed.
Right away, she pointed out how well her maroon shirt matched her maroon pants.
"I just wish I could find pink sock things and pink shoes to match this too.
I wonder if JC Penney will have any pink that could match too."
Indeed, she wants to be one color from head to foot.
While my brother was visiting over the past couple of weeks, he one day decided to ease some of the burden off my dad and take my mom shopping to JC Penney (she has been nagging dad to take her for weeks now, despite the fact I just took her to JC Penney outlet a few weeks ago.)
Mom was on a mission.
She sifted through clothing on the racks until she found what she wanted: pink pants and a pink shirt to match.
And I don't mean maroon...I mean Pink Panther pink.
Unfortunately, she wasn't able to find pink socks and pink shoes to match.
Bummer.
I've been anticipating her wearing her new pink outfit.
However, once she got home and tried them on (my brother tried to convince her to try them on at the store, but she insisted size 10 was her size and they would be fine) she found that they didn't fit.
Apparently, the stylish Skinny Jeans brand that she selected was cut smaller than her usual Gloria Vanderbilt jeans; she felt they were too tight.
Now mom has a dilemma: what do to with her pink pants.
Jeff (my husband) and I went over to my parent's house on Saturday night, a few days after her shopping trip, to visit with my brother and sister-in-law before they headed back to Arizona.
Without any greeting, mom came right up to me while I was sitting on the couch, crouched down to my level and, with her face about 6 inches away from mine, asked me if I would please consider taking her pink pants.
"What I was wondering was that I bought some really good pants at JC Penney and they don't fit and I want to bless someone with them.
What I was wondering is will you want them?"
I told my mom that it was unlikely they would fit me, seeing as we are different sizes.
"Why won't anyone let me bless them?"
she whined.
We went back and forth for a few minutes; mom, trying to convince me how "good" her pants were and that I should take them.
Me, trying to explain to her that they wouldn't fit me.
Eventually, I decided to give in and try them on.
Surely once she saw them on me she would understand that they didn't fit.
Mom raced down the hall to her bedroom as I trailed behind her.
I slipped into the pink pants and tried really hard to suppress my laughter as I looked at myself in her full-length mirror.
Unfortunately for me, my plan backfired.
Mom had no recognition that the pink pants were ill-fitted to my body.
"Oh good!
They look so good on you, yeah.
Oh good, I really wanted to bless you with these too," she said enthusiastically.
I couldn't hold back my laughter any longer.
I walked back down the hall into the living room to model the pants for my family.
Mom followed behind, tugging at my heels and continuing in her excitement about the pants.
"They look so good.
And they even look good, match your toes, too," she said, pointing to my painted toenails.
"Bless you," she added with a childish grin and a twinkle in her eye.
I tried to calm down my laughter and show her again that the pants were too big.
Mom didn't hear me or notice the excess material at the waist.
"Do you have a pink shirt too that you could wear with it?"
she continued.
Joe (my brother) tried explaining to her that she can exchange her brand new pants and get a new size that would fit.
He could've just as well tried explaining it to his 2 year old.
I debated what to do with the pants.
I eventually changed back into my own pants and folded up the pink pants, placing them on her bed.
I feel bad letting her down and dashing her hopes of me wearing her pink pants with a matching pink top.
But it just can't happen.
Not in public, anyway.
I'm hoping to help her find the receipt and make an exchange for pants that will fit her.
We'll see how that goes. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 22, 2013>
My mom used to be an excellent cook.
Growing up, she had a home cooked meal for us every night on the dinner table, where we ate together as a family.
I was always proud of mom's cooking, especially when I was dating my husband.
He used to joke that mom's cooking is what brought him over to our house every night.
Like most everything else, cooking is a skill that is long gone with the dementia.
It faded slowly.
In the beginning, she began cooking less and less and then she seemed to cook only a select variety of meals.
In the year leading up to her diagnosis, we would joke everytime Sunday dinner came around, "What do you guess it will be tonight: tacos or spaghetti?"
We had no idea at the time, of course, why she was stuck on the same meals every week.
Over the last year, her meal varieties have become less and less.
She had trouble coming up with ideas, so I made a menu for her with meals she was familiar with and would cook regularly.
Eventually, that strategy ceased to work.
Within the past few months, mom has, for the most part, quit cooking altogether.
Her list of things she will make is very short: sandwiches, tortellini (the frozen kind that you cook in boiling water) with jarred fettucine sauce and frozen mixed vegetables, salad (which has to be the iceberg lettuce mix with tomatoes and cheddar cheese, smothered in ranch dressing), and her broccoli-cauliflower salad.
She will warm up left overs for tacos, but dad has had to take the reins on preparing those meals.
For the most part, these meals don't require a stove-with the exception of the tortellini and the broccoli-cauliflower salad.
Her broccoli-cauliflower recipe (which came from my Aunt) calls for cooked bacon to be crumbled on top.
A couple months ago, we were all at mom and dad's house as mom was preparing the bacon for her salad.
She turned the flame on the stove at the highest setting, flames flipping out from under the pan.
She put her slices of bacon in the pan and let it cook.
As we observed her preparation of the bacon, we noticed how brown it was becoming and eventually the smell of it burning.
"Mom, you need to turn your bacon over now, it's getting burned," I told her, as I peered over her shoulder.
"No.
I know what I'm doing.
I'm a good cooker.
You don't have to tell me what to do, I know how to do this," she insisted, irritated with my suggestions.
"I cook 4 minutes on this side and then I turn it, 4 minutes on the other side," she continued, glancing at the clock on the stove.
"Mom, if you wait another 4 minutes it's going to be black," I tried again.
"No, you don't tell me what to do.
I never would talk like that to my mom.
I know how to do it, I'm a good cooker."
She continued burning the bacon, as I stood by, watching.
When 4 minutes were up, she flipped the bacon and continued burning it on the other side.
When she was finished, she put the bacon on a paper towel to drain the grease and picked up the pan with the remaining grease.
With the flame still on the highest setting, mom began pouring the grease into a cup which sat right next to the flame on the stovetop.
I quickly turned off the flame and exclaimed to mom that what she was doing was very dangerous.
She completely ignored what I said and continued pouring the grease.
The smell of burned bacon consumed the house.
Dad opened the doors and windows (despite mom's protests) to air the smell out of the house.
This experience was an eye opener to us all.
We knew that mom needed to be supervised in the kitchen; I think we didn't realize the seriousness of that need until this night.
I don't want to think about what could happen if she attempts to make bacon while we are not home.
Dad has taken extra precaution to make sure that he is there when mom buys her ingredients for the broccoli-cauliflower salad and that it gets made while he is present.
It's not an easy task...mom will argue about the way she cooks it and becomes very angry if we try to help (flip the bacon before the 4 minutes is up, turn down the flame, etc), but have to do what is necessary to keep her-and everyone else-safe. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 17, 2013>
For those of you who do not follow my page on Facebook, and haven't read my updates, I have taken a couple weeks off of blogging to spend some much needed time with my family.
However, a few weeks ago I was contacted by an editor of an LDS based website and asked to write a guest post about dementia for their series on mental illnesses.
It was featured on their website today.
Feel free to check it out by clicking on this link.
I'll be back to my regular blogging soon!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 4, 2013>
For the past few months, mom has been pestering us to take her to JC Penney Outlet (I say that affectionately).
We urged to her to wait until Christmas, knowing that some would be getting her gift cards for JC Penney.
So, since Christmas, she has been asking to go.
Saturday, I was the lucky one asked to take her on her shopping spree.
Mom was so excited that she even skipped her nap to go!!
Mom knew exactly what she wanted.
Immediately, she sprinted over to the dress section.
She was on a mission, searching for dresses ONLY with longer sleeves.
She was so focused on finding dresses with longer sleeves that she hadn't noticed that she had migrated into the Women's section (which is the section for larger women).
She was thrilled when she finally found what she was looking for.
The only problem was that they were all at least 2 sizes too large.
I promise I tried to tell her.
I tried to explain to her that Women's sizes meant they were for larger women.
She couldn't grasp the concept.
She looked intently at the size tag on the dress which read "1X".
"See, it says one.
It's not too big for me, no."
Okay mom, have it your way.
The only sure way to convince her would be to let her try on the dress and see for herself that it was too large.
"See mom, it's too big for you," I said, as she looked at herself in the mirror.
"No, huh-uh, it's not too big, no.
It's fine, you quit picking on me!"
she snapped back.
Mom was seemingly happy with her find.
Nevermind that she's a 5'7" woman, weighing in at only 135 pounds...she was happy with her size 1X dress.
Nevermind that it looked like a dress that should be worn by a woman from Kenya (and I mean that with no insult...it's just a fact).
Mom was happy with her selection.
Is she hurting anything wearing a dress that is too large?
No.
Just let her be happy.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 30, 2013>
As mom's abilities have been declining, so has her ability to use the phone properly.
Looking back, I can see it's been a gradual decline.
It started with her not responding or becoming distracted while we were talking with her.
For a time, she was answering the phone with aggravation in her voice, "What?"
We had to prompt her to say good-bye at the end of our phone conversations.
Most of these behaviors were before her diagnosis and we would get very irritated with her rudeness and lack of manners on the phone.
It has only gotten worse since then, although rather than being irritated, we have accepted it as a part of her disease and try to find the humor in it instead.
When answering the phone, she is often confused at who she is talking to; especially when it is a solicitor.
That can actually be quite amusing to hear.
She usually won't answer the phone if she doesn't recognize the phone on the Caller ID.
A couple of months ago, a phone call went ignored when she didn't recognize the name "Margarett Reid."
Mom seemed to forget that my Aunt Peggy's 'real' name is Margarett (this is her sister-in-law).
Lately, she doesn't answer the phone when I call.
I would say that nearly 90% of my calls go to their answering machine (unless my dad is home, of course).
I don't know if this is because she is not recognizing the ringing sound (although she will still answer on occasion) or if she is too engrossed in her computer games to hear the call or want to bother with it.
Sometimes I will start to talk on the machine,  "Mom, it's me.
Cassandra.
Answer the phone."
I'll wait a minute or so to see if she answers; she never does.
I have to admit that many times when my mom leaves messages on my answering machine, I am chuckling by the end of the message.
With this disease, you have to develop a sense of humor, or you will never survive.
I get my daily dose of humor whenever I hear a voicemail from mom.
Many times, she sounds so irritated that I'm not there; I just have to laugh (for some reason she thinks that, with 5 kids, I just sit at the home by the phone all day!)
She never has a greeting or farewell-this goes for phone calls as well as messages.
A couple of months ago, my dad went to Florida to help my brother move to Arizona and we were taking care of mom while he was gone.
Mom got wind (from her sister Claudia) that we were planning to spend the night at her house and I came home from running some errands to hear a very angry message from my mom, "Only mom," she took a short pause, "just calling to tell you I don't want anyone spending the night here, that's what Claudia said.
No!
No!"
[Click].
I probably listened to that message 5 times, laughing so hard I nearly peed my pants.
If you could hear the message, you'd understand why.
Yesterday, my sister called me giggling and relating that she checked her voicemail to hear one sentence from my mom.
"Oh you're not home, I was hoping you could bless me."
[click] We laughed together as I explained to my sister that mom had called me earlier that day as well.
She wanted me to "bless" her by taking her to Wal-mart.
When I told her I was in the middle of making dinner and had somewhere to be afterwards, she apparently called my sister.
Today, I came home from the park to find another message from mom.
"Cassandra it's your mom because your dad said to tell you, uh to call, um, to make my head-headache, my headache med- I mean" (there was a little bit of garble that I couldn't make sense of "darn it, to make my haircut thing with that girl too...[a little more garble] have her phone number but not severely early or whatever but I don't know if she's there on Wednesday or not but I don't know but maybe you could call to find out to go tomorrow or Friday or I'd like to go quicklier on Saturday.
I haven't gone for a haircut since November, I need one so do that please."
[click]  (On a side note, "that girl" is named Crystal and she's been doing her hair for about 20 years now).
This message wasn't quite as funny as some in the past.
She was clearly struggling to find the right words to communicate; she was stammering and stuttering and at some points it was hard to make out what she was saying.
Hearing her struggle to communicate what she wanted made my heart a little sad.
At some point I am sure she will lose the ability to use the phone altogether.
I've seen a major decline just in the past few months.
Of course this is a concern as it gets harder and harder to get ahold of her when we try to call.
Sometimes I get a little worried when she doesn't answer since she still is home alone part of the time (we're working on arrangements for that).
But...we just take it one day at a time!
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 28, 2013>
For some time now, mom has had issues with money.
I've blogged about it before, but it seems to getting worse and worse.
I was reminded of just how bad the situation is becoming last week, when my Uncle Mike texted me after his trip to Kmart with my mom.
He had texted me earlier that morning to double check that it would be okay to take her to buy some make-up at Kmart.
I figured my dad wouldn't mind if he took her to get a couple beauty items that she wanted.
After spending a substancial amount of time in the make-up aisle, and trying to figure out where to find the usual items she uses, they made their way to the cashier.
When it was mom's turn to pay, the items came to the total of about $38.00.
Mom was quite surprised that her selected make-up items had cost so much.
In the past (even within the last year), she's been very good about adding things up in her head to know how much her bill will be.
It became apparent, that day at the cash register, that mom has lost that ability.
Mom whipped out her change purse, took out a few dollar bills and began stacking an assortment of dimes, nickels and quarters as she tried to count it out to $38.00.
"Do you have enough?"
Uncle Mike asked her.
He also asked her if she had her debit card with her to pay.
He related that mom was unresponsive to his promptings and instead focused on sorting her coins into dollar increments.
Meanwhile, the line behind mom was growing.
People began moving to different lines to avoid the woman at the front who was counting her pennies.
At last, she finished counting.
She had come up with *about* $16.00.
As she rummaged through her purse and tried to figure out what to do next, Uncle Mike offered to pick up the remaining tab, knowing my dad would later reimburse him for whatever he needed to account for.
He gave her the remaining $22.00 that she needed and she paid for her make-up.
As they made their way out the doors, make-up bag in hand, mom gave Uncle Mike a hug and thanked him for his gift to her.
He chuckled and said, "Well I'm sure Bud will pay me back."
She responded, "Oh, I have my ATM card, do you want to take me to the bank so I can get you money?"
You mean she had her bank card the whole time???
Uncle Mike shook his head and told her it was fine; he'd just get the money later from Bud.
He didn't want to deal with her at an ATM and wasn't sure if she would try to take money that wasn't meant to take out.
When he related this story to me, I was a little surprised.
I've known her concept of money was diminishing, but up until now she seems to have been able to stay within her budget and count out how much she needs.
Today, when I was at her house, mom got out her little coin jar and dumped the change into her lap.
She began sorting the coins by quarters, nickels, dimes and pennies.
She ended up with about $10.00 in quarters and another $6.91 in other various coins.
As she finished counting her change, I walked out of her room and back down the hallway to the livingroom, to check on my boys.
Mom soon followed behind me and said, "I have six dollars and ninety-one cents more, I need to go to the bank to get dollars.
So can you take me to the bank now to get these to dollars?"
I had to hold back my giggles.
Was it worth it to go to the bank to change out such a small amount?
To mom, it was.
There was no point in trying to reason with her to save up her change until there was a larger amount to cash in.
So we got on our shoes and loaded into the car.
She wanted me to stay in the car while she went in, but I was hesitant to send her in alone and I found an excuse to accompany her inside the bank (I had a couple deposits to make).
She asked the woman at the front desk, "Can I get dollars for this?"
The woman sent her to the counter where a teller would assist her in her transaction.
Mom approached the teller and said, "I want dollars for this."
The young woman behind the glass smiled and said she could help her; mom just needed to slip the coins under the glass.
"But how do I get this all under there?
It's too big," mom said, holding her coin jar against the glass.
"Mom, she said to dump the coins out," I said, unscrewing the lid and dumping the money out under the glass which separated us from the teller.
"Oh, she wants it like that?"
Mom said.
The bank teller sorted out mom's change, as mom told her how good it was for her to have some dollars to spend and what a blessing it was.
She also made sure to remind the teller how much was there and not to forget to count the quarters (I slipped the teller an "oops card").
After a few minutes, the teller gave mom some "dollars": one-ten dollar bill, one-five dollar bill, one-one dollar bill and the remaining 91 cents.
Mom became confused when the coins were handed back to her.
"No, I want dollars.
I don't want this, I want dollars," she protested, attempting to slide the change back under the glass.
"Mom, that isn't enough to make a $1 bill," I said, placing my hand on hers to stop her from sending it back.
"No I came to get dollars," she continued to object.
Again, I tried explaining to her that it wasn't enough to make a whole dollar; it was only 91 cents.
Mom looked puzzled and the bank teller studied our interaction.
Mom kept counting the 91 cents, trying to make sense of what I was explaining to her.
Had my arms not been full with my squirmy one-year old, not to mention my fidgety 4-year old standing beside me, I would have picked some change out of my wallet to make it an even dollar.
Eventually, I reassured her that it was done correctly and picked up the change and the dollar, handing it to her and telling her to put it in her change purse.
She seemed satisfied and did what I instructed her to do.
It's going to be very hard to do, but I think it may be time to take the ATM cards away and start giving her a small allowance, as the concept of money simply isn't there anymore :(
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 25, 2013>
Today's entry was written by my mom's niece, Carolyn.
She is the daughter of mom's oldest brother.
We couldn't find a picture of her and mom together, but I found one that mom took of Carolyn and me (mom was always the one TAKING the pictures).
I'm a visual person; I think pictures make a blog more fun.
So here it is.
Thank you, Carolyn.
----------------------------------------------------------------------- I grew up mostly as the shadow of my sister Patty.
I followed her around and was happy to do what she told me to do (only when we were very little, not so much as I got older!).
Because of this, I loved to follow her to summers at Grandma's or Tia Deana's house.
Like her, I have fond memories of summers at Tia Deana's.
I was younger, so the silly things I remember about staying at her house was that we got to eat really great meals that were different than what my mom cooked (change is good sometimes!)
and because she had the best VHS tape collection ever!!!
In addition to the traditional Disney princess favorites, Tia Deana also had other fairy tale movies to show us.
Rodger and Hammerstein's Cinderella was one of them along with others that I remember like Amy Irving in Rumplestiltskin and Richard Chamberlain in another version of Cinderella, and Rebecca DeMornay in Beauty and the Beast.
Tia Deana's movies were the best - she always had a great recommend for us to watch.
I remember that she even scandalously showed us Dirty Dancing when I think my parents had expressly forbade it - Tia Deana was renegade in my eyes and so, so COOL!
We spent a lot of time at Tia Deana's house because of summers, yes, but also because she always hosted family events.
Mother's Days, Father's Days, Thanksgivings, Christmases....
I have so many memories of holidays at my Tia's house!
Any holiday at Tia's house meant that first the house would be immaculately clean and second that you could count on her bustling around the kitchen cooking, cleaning, serving, and being the hostess with the mostess.
This is why holidays always sucked when the Alves family was in San Jose for a holiday!!!
No Tia Deana's house?
No Uncle Bud to tease her and all of us?
No Cassandra, Joe, and Chris to play with?
Always that put a damper on our holiday fun.
I have a memory that is often vague, so I hope this is accurate....
But I remember that we all went to Knott's Berry Farm once and I was attempting to be brave about the ride "Montezuma's Revenge."  But as we inched closer and closer in line, my anxiety about it rose to high levels until finally when it was our turn to ride, I burst into tears.
I was too embarrassed to say that I was scared, so I instead said that the Holy Ghost told me I should not get on that ride.
I have no doubt that I made that up, but Tia did not mock me or make me feel silly or babyish for not wanting to ride the "scary" ride.
Instead she validated my feelings, encouraged me to follow the prompting to not get on the ride, and gave me hug before I moved over and waited for her and the other kids to ride the ride and join me at the exit gate.
I also always remember her spoon collection.
Tia would always pick up a commemorative/decorative spoon on any special trip that she took.
I always looked forward to seeing a new spoon and hearing her tell me about the trip she took that prompted her to pick up a new spoon for her collection.
Tia Deana could always make me laugh!
Sometimes just hearing her laugh would make me laugh.
She was a lot like Grandma in that way, that she could find humor everywhere.
Visits with my Tia always meant a lot of smiling!
I cannot offer too many specifics; all I can really say is that my childhood, growing years, and now adult years are filled with memories of family gatherings where Tia and her family were always present.
My Tia Deana has always found time to talk to me, share stories of growing up with my Dad, stories of Grandma, and stories about my Mom before and after she married my Dad, not to mention compliments galore.
I've always felt a huge amount of love and admiration from her.
To me, she was a terrific mom putting up with my 3 crazy cousins, a loving wife to my crazy uncle, and a devoted daughter to the best Grandma.
I have always admired her beautiful red hair, her sense of humor, her carefree spirit, her testimony of the Gospel, and her work ethic.
It's hard to reconcile the woman she is now with who I know she still is, there in her Spirit.
It's hard to see her sparkling personality diminished.
It's hard to see her unable to converse except for the same few topics over and over again.
It's hard to see her unable to recall details, words, emotions, and memories.
It's hard to see her unable to be cognitive or self-aware.
It's hard to understand why this trial has to be hers, and her husband and children's' trial as well.
It's hard.
But I know that her Spirit is unchanged, it is just subject to the frailties of her human body at the moment.
My Tia may be different now because her brain is no longer healthy, but she is still the beautiful woman who is the author of all the sweet memories shared above.
I will celebrate her and honor her always.
She is my Tia and I love her!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 24, 2013>
Today was our 6 month check up at UCLA.
I want to write about it while it's still fresh in my mind...I will do my best to relay the details of the visit ;) Many people ask the question: "Now that she has her diagnosis, and there is no cure or treatment for semantic dementia, what is the point of continuing to go to UCLA?"
First of all, UCLA has been a Godsend to us.
When our regular medical clinic doctors could not figure out what was wrong with my mom (over the period of 2 years), UCLA made a diagnosis in a matter of a few hours.
These people know their stuff...they are the leaders and true experts in the field of dementia.
It goes without saying that these are the professionals who will guide us through this dementia process.
When my mom's primary doctor and neurologist "didn't feel comfortable" signing mom's disabilities form, because "she seems fine to me", UCLA helped us to obtain disability and Social Security for mom.
These are the people we want on our team.
There is no cure for dementia.
The protein present in the brain (in semantic dementia) was only discovered in 2006.
There is a lot of work and research to be done.
They can't do this without patients.
By taking mom to UCLA, I feel like it can only help further their research in the disease.
When and if they come up with experimental drugs for this form of dementia, we are already on their radar.
Mom does not share our feelings of gratitude and respect for the UCLA team.
It was after her visit (and diagnosis) to UCLA last March that mom was "cancelled" as a driver.
This just illustrates the point that these people are true professionals.
They are mandated to report their findings to the DMV and did such; the other doctors were negligent in doing this.
For anyone who has been around my mom over the past few days, they've heard her resistance about her upcoming appointment at UCLA, "I don't want to go to those mean doctors who cancelled me as a driver."
My dad had to bribe her to go.
She really wants to drive up to Utah for her and my dad's anniversary next month; dad told her that if she didn't go today, there would be no trip to Utah.
It may sound harsh, but sometimes you do what you gotta do!
Last night, I told my dad that he should drive his truck to the appointment, rather than the SUV which she tends to get more motion sickness riding in.
When I arrived at his house this morning, they were sitting in his truck, ready to go.
Mom skipped her morning Slim Fast (which dad always urges her to do on a long car ride) and the combination of the two seemed to do the trick; she made it to UCLA without any car sickness!
Upon arrival at UCLA, my dad dropped us off at the front doors to go check in while he parked the truck.
I walked mom to the receptionist and no sooner than I told them her name, mom started talking over me stating exactly how she felt about the visit, "I'm not so happy about being here, cuz this doctor is the one who cancelled me as a driver, even though I was always a really good driver too and I don't know why he had to cancel me.
I just hope he'll let me be a driver again..." I redirected mom to sit in the waiting area until we were called back.
Dad joined us and a few minutes later, Jill (the nurse practitioner) came out to greet us and bring us back to a room.
"Hi Deana, I'm Jill.
I'm the nurse, do you remember me?"
I didn't hear mom's exact response, but it was something like, "You're the one who lived in San Bernardino."
Jill was amazed that mom could recall that Jill had mentioned, at their previous meeting, that she grew up in San Bernardino.
Not even my dad or I remembered that detail!
The only other thing mom seemed to remember from her previous visits was the fact that they "cancelled" her as a driver.
And boy did she give Jill an earful...all the way down the hall and into the room!
Dr. Mendez followed behind us into the room, shook our hands and right away, mom unloaded her driving woes to him, "But I was just so sad that you cancelled me as a driver.
I was always a really good driver too.
And even though, they say I have that thing...that demen-dementia thing-but I don't think I have that.
What are the symptoms of that, dementia?
'Cause I don't think I have that.
And I was always so good as a driver too, I never got any tickets and never any accidents, I was really so good.
And even before you cancelled me, months before we went on a trip to San Diego and I drove all that way, really long way, and I did so good too and I wasn't such an unsafe driver.
I'm just so sad.
I can't drive myself to the store and to church and other places too and to the pharmacy and see family and other friends too..." This conversation went on for about 15 minutes with no pause for Dr. Mendez to respond to what she was saying, no joke.
Dr. Mendez tried to redirect her by asking questions.
He sat right in front of her, giving her direct eye contact as he spoke.
"How are you doing otherwise?"
Mom looked at him for several seconds, trying to make sense of his question as he repeated it for her.
"I'm okay," she said hesitantly, "but I really felt so much better when I was a driver...and I don't know why you cancelled me and could I please drive again?"
She continued on, rubbing her hands together nervously, which Dr. Mendez noticed.
After asking her a few times if she was nervous, and receiving no answer, he turned his attention to my dad and me.
"She seems really nervous, does she always do this with her hands?"
We nodded our heads.
Mom continued to talk about her driving, rarely pausing and unable to follow his redirection.
Dr. Mendez finally asked us some questions, as mom continued rambling.
At one point, when Dr. Mendez was looking and speaking to me, mom looked over at me, then back at Dr. Mendez and said, very assertively, "Why do you keep talking to them when I'm talking to you?"
I have to admit, we were all suppressing our giggles at that remark.
Dr. Mendez began asking her questions in an attempt to assess where she is at in the progression of the disease.
If you read about the appointment 6 months ago, you might remember that she looked at several pictures and [attempted] to name the objects and people that she saw.
On the scale that they use to assess how advanced her disease is, mom was only able to pass 1 out of 20 questions.
Basically, she is no longer on the charts for that assessment, which means it was not useful to put her through that series of questioning again.
Instead, he asked her more basic questions.
"What is that?"
he asked, pointing to mom's wedding ring.
"Huh?
This?
My wedding ring," she stammered.
"What is this?"
he asked, tugging on her navy blue, fleece sweater.
Across the front of her sweater are the words: USA.
Mom looked down at the sleeve he was tugging on and responded in a low, somewhat mumbly and stuttering voice, "This, oh I got this in Massa-Massachussetts when we went.
And it says America on it, oh see it has the letters USA on it."
"But what is it?"
Dr. Mendez asked again.
"It says USA," mom said, mumbling some other things about her sweater.
Dr. Mendez tried another article of clothing.
"What is that?"
he asked, touching her shoe.
"Hmmm?"
mom asked, looking down at her shoe while he restated the question.
"That's my shoe.
And my sock," she added, looking at her sock.
Then added "Jeans" as she patted her lap.
As the doctor questioned mom, I noticed that her demeanor changed and she seemed more reserved and submissive, as she tried to comprehend what he was asking her.
Dr. Mendez turned focus back to her sweater.
"So what is this then?
Is it your shirt?"
Mom opened up the front part of her jacket to reveal her shirt sleeve.
"My shirt, yeah."
"That is your shirt, what is this thing over your shirt?"
he asked again, touching her sweater.
Mom sat quiet for a moment, trying to figure out what to name her sweater.
She raised her eyebrows, then furrowed them down again and she stared at her sweater.
She let out a quiet "Hmph" to indicate she was thinking but not quite sure.
She tugged on her right sweater sleeve with her left hand as she very meekly said, "It's to keep me warm."
Dr. Mendez pointed to a button on her shirt.
"What is that?"
he asked.
Mom studied her button intently and mumbled something inaudible.
He tried to redirect her attention to the button on his shirt.
It took a few promptings before she finally looked up at his button.
"I have one too, what is this called?"
he asked.
She looked back down at her button and said, very quietly, "Hmmm.
I don't remember the name.
It's a ba-a ball thing."
He then pointed to her purse.
"What is that?"
"Hmmm?
My purse.
That's my purse," she said, extending a protective hand onto her purse.
Dr. Mendez pointed to the strap on the purse.
"And what is this on your purse?"
he asked.
"It's...you put it on like this," she said, grabbing the strap and putting it over her shoulder.
Our semantic memory helps us to recognize and identify things in the world around us.
Our brain lumps things into categories.
For example: a dog, cat, octopus, etc would be lumped into a category with animals.
Pants, nylons, sweaters, etc would go into a clothes category.
Mom's brain is forgetting the specific names for things in each category, but is still identifying the category itself that it belongs in.
She can remember the name of her purse, but she can't name specifics on her purse (such as the strap/handle).
She can still, in so many words, explain the function of many things even though she can't remember the word for it.
But even her memory and recognition of many things is diminishing.
Dr. Mendez then reviewed some information about semantic dementia with us.
First and foremost, he reassured me that there is no genetic link found in this particular form of frontotemporal lobe dementia.
In almost every other variation of frontotemporal dementia, there is a familial link; the semantic variant is not one of them.
Semantic dementia is linked to a protein found in the brain.
It was only discovered in 2006, so there is still very little known as to why it is there and what it is doing.
There are no medications at this time to treat semantic dementia.
The only thing we can treat are the symptoms that come with the disease.
We talked about many of mom's symptoms, and worked a plan around how to treat those.
One symptom we addressed is mom's rigidity in her routine and her obsessive behaviors.
There are SSRI's (Selective Seratonin Reuptake Inhibitor) that can help obsessive behaviors.
They are safer to take than many of the medications she is on and could possibly help with her OCD.
I say possibly because each person is individual; what works for one will not work for all.
They have seen improvements in some patients while in others the medications have not helped.
We won't know until we try.
If it is successful, mom might relax a little in her rigid routine (she is obsessive about her naptimes, leaving at a certain time from family dinners on Sundays, etc).
Another way this medication might help is in her fixations on aches, pains and bodily functions.
Dr. Mendez explained to us, as he did at previous visits, about the "hypochondria" in these patients...this time in a little more detail.
Patients with semantic dementia tend to (for whatever reason) become fixated on bodily functions.
They seem to lose the meaning of what bodily functions represent.
For example, their stomachs may growl and make noise and it confuses the patient; they can't make sense of why their stomach is making that noise and they tend to obsess about it.
As Dr. Mendez was explaining this to us, my mind flashed back to the countless complaints day after day from mom about her bodily functions.
"Gosh, I'm burping so much," she says, as she lets out exaggerated burps, "I just don't know why I keep burping so much.
I'm so weird.
I wish the doctors could help me know why I'm burping so much."
"I'm so weird, my stomach keeps making these weird noises, I don't know why it's doing that.
I'm so weird."
"I wonder if I should ask the doctor too why when I yawn I get all this watery stuff in my eyes too.
It's so embarassing, I'm so weird."
Listening to Dr. Mendez' explanation connected a lot of dots for me.
Focusing and obsessing on these bodily functions is part of the disease.
In congruence with the bodily functions is the focus on the aches and pains.
What might feel like a twitch or a pin prick to you or me feels like a very "severe" pain to mom.
She is obsessed with every little thing she feels.
My dad brought up the subject of her medications.
One concern we've had is the amount of medications that mom is taking (each one related to some ache or pain she is feeling).
"With the amount of medication she is on, she shouldn't be feeling any pain.
She should be in la-la land," dad told Dr. Mendez.
Dr. Mendez agreed that dad had a valid point.
Surely, if the pain were real, the medications she is on should be controlling the pain.
He suggested that by taking an SSRI, it could relax those obsessions and fixations on her bodily functions and perhaps some of the pain would dissipate.
If it works, we could then wean her from some of the pain meds she is taking.
So a plan was set: they will write a letter with their recommended plan of action and send it to mom's geriatric doctor (we all feel it's best to keep medication under the control of only one doctor).
The medication they are prescribing is a generic form of Zoloft.
It has been effective in some patients and unsuccessful in others.
There is no sure way to tell until we try it out.
Another concern we brought to the table was about mom's weight and eating.
At her last visit in July, mom weighed 152 lbs.
At this visit, she weighed in at 140 lbs.
(though she argued with them that their scale was inaccurate...her scale weighed her at 135 lbs).
They reiterated some of the things we already knew; people with semantic dementia become very selective with their foods.
They begin to lose recognition of different foods.
We have certainly seen this to be true with my mom and Jill recognized that as well, having read my Thanksgiving blog.
If mom does not recognize a particular food (which is most of the time), she will not even try it.
Another problem is that people with this disease tend to lose their sense of smell.
Eating is 90% smell.
If you don't recognize a smell, or if you have problems with your sense of smell, eating becomes an issue.
This, combined with the loss of recognition, is the cause of mom's lack of interest in eating.
As it is now, there are about 10 things on mom's "menu" list of foods that she will eat.
As time goes on, that could dwindle down even less to where she only has a couple of things she will eat.
Surely, this will become an even bigger problem than it is now.
Dr. Mendez and Jill asked us if we had any other concerns or questions.
My dad asked, "Is there anything we should be expecting in the near future?"
A good question.
In relation to the food dilemma, people with dementia tend to put things in their mouths that are not food.
I have read this before; patients will eat paper or put small objects in their mouth, which can become a choking hazard.
They lose the meaning of food altogether.
In the next year, we could possibly expect to see mom putting things in her mouth that are not food, OR she might try to eat food items in an inappropriate way.
For example, she may try to eat spoonfuls of flour (it's technically a food, but it is not to be eaten by itself!)
We asked if there was any way to estimate about how long each phase will last.
Understandably, they are hesitant to answer that question.
This disease affects every individual differently.
It could last up to 20 years with some and maybe only 2 years with others.
He also made a comment about my mom still being "so young", even though she falls into the age category; she is still relatively young to be going through this.
I expressed my concern that it seems to be progressing very quickly with mom.
I don't intend to sound like a pessimist; but I consider myself a realist and I simply want to be prepared for what is ahead.
I slightly held my breath as I figured out how to ask the question that has been on my mind, "Is this disease more aggressive when it hits at a younger age?"
Dr. Mendez looked straight at me as he confirmed my suspicions, "Yes.
It is more aggressive when it hits at a younger age."
I do appreciate his honesty.
We talked some more about prevention...making sure mom is kept safe when she is alone.
Ideally, we would like someone there to monitor her and ensure her safety when dad is away, but unfortunately that is not possible at this time (we're working on that).
In the meantime, we need to take necessary preventitive measures to keep her safe, just as you would a small child.
We discussed the topic of speech and I asked if she would eventually lose her entire ability to talk.
He explained that it's not exactly that she will lose her ability to speak, but she will lose words, meanings of words, objects and concepts, therefore making it difficult to communicate.
We can already see that happening.
I suppose only time will tell how severely her speech will be limited.
After an hour and a half of talking with Jill and Dr. Mendez, we left feeling a little more educated on what is to come.
We feel satisfied with a plan of action between UCLA and mom's geriatric doctor and hopeful that we might see some improvement in her behaviors.
We will also be receiving additional resources on support groups and seminars to help us in this journey.
We will follow up in another 6 months and in the meantime, they are there to assist us with whatever other questions or concerns that come up.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 22, 2013>
Being a mom of three young children means that often times, I need to be creative at meal time.
My 7-year-old, in particular, is going through an extremely picky phase with her food.
I can't get her to try anything new for breakfast; everyday it is cereal.
Packing a healthy lunch is like pulling teeth.
And not because I have an excess of unhealthy options to choose from.
I rarely buy chips, cookies and other junk and, in general, I try to stay away from too many processed foods.
She's picky when it comes to sandwiches or the "main" entree of her lunch.
When I make her choose a fruit or vegetable to pack along with her lunch, she acts as if I am asking her to pack a cockroach!
"I don't want to eat that...I don't like that!"
It's gotten so bad that I've had to enforce a new rule in the house: if you don't eat healthy throughout the day (including fresh fruits and vegetables), you can forget about any sweets or desserts for the rest of the day.
That tends to motivate them.
But not without fussing.
Still, I am always looking for ways to "trick" my kids into eating healthy.
Aside from simply forcing them to eat fresh fruits and veggies, I found a cookbook that teaches how to cook fruit and veggie purees into all kinds of foods: breakfast, desserts, snacks, etc.
It's been fun experimenting with new recipes and even more amusing to watch them wolf down their afternoon snacks without them knowing all of the healthy fruits and veggies I've hidden inside!
When someone you love has dementia, they become very childlike (do I sound like a broken record yet??)
My mom is actually far worse than my kids are when it comes to food.
I can usually coax my kids into at least trying things; my mom will look at something, and if she doesn't recognize it (which is the case 90% of the time), she won't even try it.
Furthermore, she will not venture away from her "staple" foods.
Her main staple food for breakfast is her Slim Fast drink.
Mom complains of tummy troubles nearly everyday.
Lately, it has gotten really bad (you can read more about that on my post from last week).
She met with a geriatric doctor for the first time last Thursday, who will be taking over all of her healthcare and medications from here on out (rather than meeting with several doctors and getting medicated by each one).
When the issue of her stomach ache came up, he suggested that she might be developing a lactose intolerance.
I still believe that it has to do with the combination of the Slim Fast (known to give stomach problems) along with the liquid diet and medication.
Nevertheless, we are open to exploring every angle to solve this problem.
I have recently been reading a lot about dairy and links to certain health issues, so it could be possible that her body is having a hard time processing the dairy.
We've talked about taking away her Slim Fast, but she becomes very combative at the mere suggestion of substituting her breakfast.
We thought that, perhaps, the easiest place to start would be by substituting her milk with a lactose free variety.
I recently have been drinking almond milk, and I think it's a great alternative to milk.
My dad and I went to the store that night and bought some almond milk, with the idea that we would explain to her that we would try a different milk.
As my dad was unloading groceries from the car, he gave me the almond milk and asked me to explain to her what we wanted to do.
I tried to tell my mom that the doctor believed that the milk might be the root of her stomach problems.
"What?
No, milk is not my problem, no.
Milk is always real healthy for my body too and I always drink milk and it's never given me problems, no."
"Mom, sometimes when people get older their bodies change and different foods make them feel bad," I explained, trying to break it down simply for her to understand.
I knew she would not understand terms such as "lactose intolerance" and "dairy".
"Sometimes milk can make people's stomach hurt.
We just want to try a different kind of milk that would help your stomach feel better," I continued.
She would not look at the milk that I was holding in my hand and presenting to her.
She became angry and looked away with her eyebrows furrowed and a scowl on her face.
"No, you are making me real angry.
I can drink that milk, it's okay and real good for my body.
No, you guys keep picking on me.
I don't like it."
She turned her body away from me and tried to walk out of the kitchen.
She was met by my dad in the doorway; he held his arm across the doorway to prevent her from storming out.
"Dear, will you please just listen to her?
She's trying to tell you something to help you," he said, trying to redirect her back to the conversation.
"I'm trying to help you mom," I added.
"I'm trying to help your stomach problems go away."
"No I know that milk is real healthy for me.
I even used to teach that to my students, that milk is healthy and nutritious for our bodies," she argued back.
"Milk is healthy, but it can also cause stomach problems," I countered.
"We just want to try something new, dear.
We're trying to figure out what the cause is and we can't do that unless you try some new things.
We won't know if it's the milk unless you stop drinking it for a few days and see how your stomach feels," he tried explaining.
I could almost see the words going into one ear and straight out the other.
Our explanations held no meaning to her.
She simply could not understand that we were trying to help her; we were trying to take something away that she wanted and in doing so we had become the enemy.
"I'm real angry with you guys picking on me!
I know what I'm talking about, I know what's nutritious for my body!"
she yelled back.
With that said, she pushed through my dad's arm and raced down the hall to her bedroom, slamming the door behind her.
My dad and I looked at one another with discouragement in our eyes.
Although we could have predicted the outcome, we had been hopeful she would listen to reason.
I attended a few support group meetings over the summer and there is one, recurring phrase that the director would say over and over.
Those words continue to play in my mind and as I stood in my parent's kitchen, feeling defeat in losing the milk battle, those words returned to me again: Sometimes it is kinder to lie.
An idea came to me.
I had hoped it wouldn't come to this, but it was a last resort.
"Dad...we need to switch out the milk.
She will never know the difference.
She mixes it with her Slim Fast anyway, and she is losing her sense of taste as it is.
I don't think she'll ever notice."
Dad contemplated this solution.
With a dementia person, it is next to impossible to reason or give explanations.
Trying to get them to do something they don't want to do is extremely frustrating and exhausting for the caregiver.
Sometimes, a caregiver needs to be sneaky not only for their sanity, but for the sake of the person they are caring for.
Mom may never know the difference if we switch her milk, but if we bring up the idea to her she will become angry and combative.
Hence, it is kinder to her to simply switch out the milk without her knowledge.
She can continue to be happy and think she is drinking her "nutritious" milk.
My dad has struggled with this concept.
In a relationship, and particularly a marriage, honesty is the foundation for success.
My parents have always had a very honest relationship.
I think it's hard for him to feel as though he is deceiving his wife, even though it has become necessary in many situations.
And I think he is also trying to allow her to keep her freedoms for as long as possible.
As hard as it is for me to think about deceiving my mom, I know it's that much harder for my dad.
After conversing with my dad about the milk, we thought to try having my brother (who was driving in from Arizona that night) make her Slim Fast for her the next morning, substituting her milk and observing if she noticed the difference.
However, after thinking more and more about that option, we concluded that it would not be the best way to go.
Mom is very particular about the details of her morning Slim Fast, down to the cup she uses, the amount of milk she pours and how many times she stirs it (100, to be exact).
When my sister-in-law and brother got in late that night, they were able to convince my dad to pour out her half-empty gallon of milk and substitute it with the almond milk.
The next morning, I began receiving texts from Natalie (my sister-in-law) at the time my mom was preparing her Slim Fast.
"Milk in her hand...let's see if she falls for it...she's stirring 100 times...about to drink it..." And then finally, the text, "Success!!!
She's drinking it!"
For the remainder of the weekend, mom drank her Slim Fast, every morning, never knowing that we had switched her milk.
It could be coincidence, or it could be the almond milk, but mom's stomach problems have not been as "severe" over the past few days.
Indeed, sometimes it is "kinder to lie".
Our next step: to replace her chocolate Slim Fast with chocolate protein powder!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 18, 2013>
Today's post was written by my sister-in-law, Natalie, who is married to my twin brother, Joe.
Enjoy!
--------------------------------------------------------------------- When Cassandra (my sister in law) talks about her mom and how she used to be I'm sad I never got to be part of those moments.
Deana's behavior started changing right about the time I met her son Joe.
Despite this, she was still able to do a lot of things that she isn't able to do now.
One of my fondest memories of my mother-in-law is when I joined my [then] boyfriend on a vacation to the east coast in 2007.
It is where I first got to know her and Bud, my father-in-law.
I remember being incredibly apprehensive about meeting them.
Hoping to make a good impression, I conversed with Deana at length about myself and how much I cared for her son.
She was so kind and open.
I fell in love with her immediately.
Her kind blue eyes didn't judge me.
I was investigating the Church (I wasn't yet a member) and I didn't quite know how she would feel about it.
Early one morning I remember making Joe stop at a Starbucks in Connecticut.
I NEEDED my mocha latte to start my day.
She didn't say a word about it to me!
Now it makes me giggle because I'm sure she was giving Bud an earful about it in the car.
During our time there we went to Connecticut to visit Bud's side of the family.
We enjoyed visiting the sea port, going on a drive up to Salem, Massachusetts, some battlegrounds in Lexington and Concord and finally a stop in New York City.
Deana was engaged, excited, and happy going.
It was a pleasure to travel with her.
I loved seeing how lovey dovey she was with Bud.
Growing up in a single parent home, I never got to see that type of interaction between a "Mom and Dad" It was refreshing.
These two clearly were the cutest love birds.
After this we emailed back and forth on many occasions.
She was really great at giving advice.
Just before we moved to Arizona I came across several emails that she had written me.
Now I don't even recognize the person who wrote those insightful emails.
It saddened me to actually see this great change in writing.
Joe and I got married during thanksgiving in 2009.
I got a taste of Deana's famous Thanksgiving dinner.
To say the least it was the most incredible Thanksgiving dinner I had ever eaten.
While Joe and Bud visited the everglades in the morning of Thanksgiving Day she single handedly cooked a feast.
Turkey and gravy, lyonnaised carrots, mashed potatoes, rolls, a couple of other things I can't recall at the moment.
It was amazing.
She was an amazing cook.
I remember emailing her about recipes all the time when Joe and I first got married.
During the same week, our wedding day is when I also started to note a few behaviors that were a little off.
This was before her heart surgery, which we all first attributed the changes we were seeing.
I wondered why she hugged her purse all night during Thanksgiving at my family's house or why she kept making strange comments about our wedding cake and how she could have done it better... it wasn't like her.
Shortly after, she went in for her heart surgery and this really the last time I got to see any of the Deana I had first met in Connecticut.
She progressed at a rapid rate.
When our daughter was born, she and Bud came to visit.
I was a bit hurt with the disconnect there was between her and Adri.
She was excited to be there but was emotionally withdrawn.
They came to visit again right before Adri turned one.
She helped me bake Adri's first cake.
She was incredibly picky about food.
Only wanted to eat certain things.
We didn't yet know what was really going on.
It was so confusing.
Today I can't have a conversation with my mother-in-law.
I can't ask her for any parenting advice or what's the best type of icing to use for birthday cakes.
I can't expect her to even remember who I am if I don't visit every month.
It's sad and I hate that she has to have this disease.
It's comforting to know that this time here on earth is but a minute in all of eternity and that I will have an opportunity to meet her again-in a place that she is whole once more. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 15, 2013>
Yesterday the kids headed back to school, and I started to settle back into my weekly routine, beginning with my Monday at mom's house.
The morning greeted me with a fierce wind and a crisp chill in the air.
As I pulled up to mom's house, I hurriedly got the boys out of the car, struggling as I tried to balance my one year old on my hip while carrying in some other items; all the while, the wind was wildly blowing my hair in my face, making it difficult to see what I was doing.
We rushed up to the front door and rang the bell.
And waited.
And waited.
And waited.
I fumbled with my keys as I tried to find the right one for the screen door.
Ever since dad re-keyed the front doors, I've been having trouble with my key.
After a couple of minutes, which seemed much longer than a couple of minutes while battling the winds, I managed to get the lock opened and walked into the dark, empty living room.
This has become our routine: me, ringing the bell and fumbling with my keys, while mom sits in her back bedroom ignoring the sound of the bell.
She doesn't want to come out and answer the door looking like a "plain Jane".
She's been doing this to my Aunts and Uncle who have been going over weekly to help her as well.
Fortunately for me, I have a key to the house.
Unfortunately for them, they don't.
They call on the phone; she ignores the calls.
They usually end up texting or calling me and I tell them to keep ringing until she answers.
Eventually she answers the door.
As soon as I entered the house, I opened up the blinds to let some sunlight into the room.
I set up the "Thomas The Train" tracks and train for the boys to play on, then went in search for my mom.
Of course I knew right where she was at.
I knocked lightly on her bedroom door and said, "Mom, it's me," as I let myself into her room.
I found her in the dark, sitting on the edge of her bed with her back slumped forward and arms folded across her chest.
She looked over at me and immediately began filling me in on everything on her mind, jumping from topic to topic and barely pausing inbetween or allowing me to get a word in edgewise.
"Were you told how severely sick I am?
I'm really severe, my stomach.
Since Saturday.
I've been so severe and sick and my tummy hurts real bad in here too," she rubs her tummy as she talks to me, "and yesterday I didn't even go to church 'cause I felt too severe and I even threw up last night too.
And my nose and my eyes were real wet too, with watery stuff on them too and it's so weird, I'm so weird."
I tried interrupting her to ask her what she had eaten yesterday.
I strongly believe there is a connection between her eating (or lack of) and her stomach problems.
She stared at me with a blank face while I repeated the question to which she finally answered, "Your dad made me eat some salad stuff for dinner 'cause I wasn't real hungry but I didn't eat much yesterday so he told me to eat some salad then.
But my stomach has these pains here and I hope I'm not getting that real severe stomach sick thing that comes, thas happens around November-I hope I'm not getting that.
I'm just so sad, I wish the doctors would help me with my stomach problems too, I'm just so sad.
I feel so severe.
I just hope I'm not dying, I hope I'm not gonna die but I haven't seen anyone spiritually, I haven't seen my mom, so no, I'm not dying but I feel so sad and so weird, with how I'm changing too."
Without skipping a beat, she continued, "I'm just getting so weird and I feel like I'm really looking so weird too and when I wake up my hair is sticking up like this," she pulls her hair straight up, "and I look like Sister [So-n-so] from school-from church.
And even though yesterday I put some make-up on and your dad was real okay with me.
He says he's still okay with me and that I still look like when I was a teenager, but I don't think so, no.
He still tells me every morning 'love you dear' so he's still happy with me, thank goodness, even though I'm looking so weird and different.
And I just hope that you're okay with me too with how I'm changing."
At this point in the conversation (this is a recurring conversation every time I see her), I reassure her that she looks like the same mom I grew up with and that she looks just fine without her make-up on.
I asked my mom if I could make her some toast to help settle her stomach.
"Toast...I'm trying to remember what toast is..." I reminded her that it was bread with peanut butter and that she used to make it for me when I was sick and when I was pregnant and unable to keep any food down.
She insisted that she wasn't feeling hungry and would not eat it.
I decided to give her until lunch time before I forced her to eat anything.
I'm concerned about her eating situation.
Her pickiness has made mealtime extremely difficult.
There are approximately 10 different menu items that she will eat between breakfast, lunch and dinner.
Lately, she feels too "severe" to eat at all.
Like I mentioned earlier, I believe this is a combination of the medications she is taking and the foods she is/isn't eating.
She starts the morning off with Slim Fast and medication.
Slim Fast has been known to be the source of gas and stomach discomfort.
Trying to argue this fact with mom is about as productive as trying to pull a full-grown oak tree out of the ground with your bare hands: it simply won't budge.
I think the Slim Fast itself, along with the fact that it's pure liquid, and in combination with her medication, causes her stomach to become upset.
Once her stomach is upset, she decides that she doesn't want to eat because it will make her feel worse.
I know that when I am very hungry, I start to feel a little nauseous and headachey, which is what she expresses that she feels often.
I think that she is also having hunger pains but has lost the ability to recognize it as pains due to her hunger.
That is common with this disease (from what I have learned); to lose the ability to know when one is full or hungry.
When she starts to feel sick like this, she "psychs" herself out and I think she actually talks herself into throwing up.
It starts with exaggerated gagging noises, followed by her spitting out "watery stuff", and then usually finishes with her gagging her food/drink out.
Towards the beginning of this disease, mom put on a lot of weight.
Again, this is most likely due to the fact that they lose the ability to tell when they are "full", and they tend to overeat.
Then there comes a point where they lose weight.
This can be due to many reasons: pickiness, losing the ability to swallow, etc.
About 1 1/2-2 years ago, mom's weight was at her all time heaviest, around 180 lbs.
She is now down to 140 lbs (which is even below her average weight) and I'd say a good part of that weight has been lost within the last 6-9 months.
She thinks it's great and wonderful that she is losing weight, but it is not being done in the right manner and I worry with how quickly she's been losing it.
I left my mom in her room to rest for a while and went into the office, where I drafted a chart to track what mom is eating everyday as pictured...not the greatest picture in the world, but you get the idea ;)).
Basically, it tracks what she is eating everyday for breakfast, lunch, dinner and snacks inbetween.
As you can see, Sunday she hardly ate a thing, which is what I'm afraid has been happening far too much lately.
I printed out a few copies and put them in a 3 ring binder.
I shared this information with family members who go over to her house and asked that they could write down what she is eating and approximate quantities of her food.
I'm hoping that this will help give us, and her doctors, a better idea of what is upsetting her and work on how to address it.
Of course, I have my theory on her stomach issues, but having it written out will be beneficial in taking it to her doctor.
Sometimes patients respond better when a doctor tells them what the problem is then when a family member tries to tell them.
I explained the chart and the reasoning behind it to my mom.
I don't think she understood much of what I saying and I don't have high hopes that she will fill it out herself.
That is why I talked to family members and my dad and asked them to track her eating everyday, as a group effort.
A little after noon, I went back into mom's room and brought to her attention that it was past lunchtime.
She very faintly shook her head and said, "No my stomach is still hurting, I'm not hungry."
I suggested that she might feel better if she eat and was pretty insistent with her that she needed to get some food in her stomach.
I gently took her hand and pulled her up and off of her bed and down the hallway to the kitchen.
To my complete amazement, mom was compliant; although she did not want peanut butter toast.
She wanted her usual turkey, tomato and american-sliced cheese sandwich with lots of mustard and submarine oil.
I was just happy that she ate.
I was not with her later in the day, so I don't know if she ate later on or if she started to feel any better, but hopefully it's all being written down on her chart.
Hypochondria is a common symptom with her disease, and I know sometimes we all get tired of hearing the same conversations every time she talks (about how "severe" she is feeling).
While we sometimes have to ignore some of the complaining, I think we also need to help her problem solve so she can be more comfortable.
Her "severe" stomach problems could be a simple problem to solve.
Solving is much harder than it sounds with a person with dementia, however, as they cannot comprehend much and are not very agreeable with what you want them to do.
We are meeting with a geriatric doctor for the first time this week, who specializes in care for the elderly and people with dementia; this means all of her health issues and medications will be taken care of by ONE doctor, rather than the several she has been seeing.
Hopefully this will help in managing the "severe" aches and pains she has been feeling. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 14, 2013>
Last night, my sister-in-law told me I need to "get crackin'" on my blog (she is an avid reader ;) ).
I know I haven't been so great about blogging these past few weeks and I wanted to let you all know that I AM ALIVE!!!!
My kids have been on winter break for 3 weeks; today is their first day back to school!!
It's been challenging, as you can imagine, to find time to blog with 5 kids to tend to.
When they are on break, I try my best to be active with them and create good memories.
We've been busy crafting, cleaning, going to the movies, Knott's Berry Farm and other outings.
Not to mention the holidays thrown in the mix and out-of-town family visiting!
To those who read my blog...hang in there, I'll be writing again this week!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 4, 2013>
Christmas is finally over.
Ordinarily, I love every single moment of the Christmas season.
It is my favorite season of the entire year and I anticipate it for months in advance.
I relish in choosing the perfect gifts for each person, in going to the Christmas parties and hearing the joyful sounds of Christmas carols.
This year, I was just wasn't feeling that Christmas spirit.
We had some nice moments and carried on our family traditions of building Gingerbread houses and Christmas cookies, visiting Santa, going downtown to see the lights, reading scriptures on the birth of Jesus.
We did Christmas crafts and attended Christmas concerts (band and choir) for our girls.
I did my usual Christmas baking and delivered goodies to close friends.
We went to a Christmas party at church with my dad and I even threw the kids a party/gift exchange with their friends.
I picked out the best gifts for the people I love, things that came from the heart that I knew they would love.
But as hard as I tried, I couldn't shake off the feeling of emptiness and sadness that hung over my head, like a dark cloud.
Something was missing.
That something, is my mom.
I miss my mom.
In years past, we spent our baking days together, listening to Christmas music while we worked.
We always went shopping together, whether it was to shop for the kids or shop for my dad or to pick out presents for other people on our list.
Mom loved it when we came to her ward's Christmas party at church.
It's always been important to my parents to have all the grandkids together for those kinds of parties and keep our family traditions intact.
The season started out a little bit better than expected.
Mom made a Christmas card list, filled out all of her Christmas cards, complete with a message about Jesus, and sent them all out on her own.
That was encouraging to me!
We went over to their house to help them decorate the tree, and she remembered how to do that (even though it was not decorated up to her pre-dementia perfectionist standards).
I felt a little bit of hope that maybe she would still remember and engage in our Christmas traditions of the past.
As the season wore on, mom seemed disconnected from all the festivities surrounding her.
She did not go the Christmas parties at church.
She couldn't remember what any of our Christmas goodies were, let alone help bake them.
She didn't know who Santa was.
She seemed confused on what many of the festivities were about.
Aside from the shopping trip to Kmart for my dad, she didn't engage or even attempt to engage in any Christmas shopping.
My siblings and I coordinated all of the Christmas meals without any interest or input from my mom (she was just happy that I had assigned her to bring the broccoli-cauliflower salad for Christmas Eve).
On Christmas morning, we did what we do every year: we opened our presents at home with our kids and then went over to mom and dad's for our traditional Christmas breakfast.
Christmas is not Christmas without this breakfast.
We wait all year to have this yummy goodness.
We have had this breakfast every single year of my life.
Mom's mom came up with this recipe and started making it for her kids when mom was little.
So by all means, mom should have remembered Christmas breakfast.
As I was began making breakfast, mom walked into the kitchen.
I asked mom if she'd be having Christmas breakfast with us, knowing deep down that she wouldn't have any.
She looked at it strangely and said, "No I didn't know about that."
"Mom, this is the Christmas breakfast that your mom created.
We've eaten it every year, you always loved it!
Christmas isn't Christmas without it!"
"No I didn't remember about that.
I already drank my Slim Fast," she said, as she walked out of the kitchen.
It was the expected response, but still disheartening to say the least.
If she's forgotten the traditions of the holiday that we've held so near and dear all these years, who is to say she will even remember the holiday itself next year?
In the past, mom always got giddy at present time.
She absolutely loved to pass out presents to her grandkids and delighted in their reactions to what she had picked out for them.
This time, mom sat on the couch, staring straight ahead with a blank look on her face.
She showed no reaction and no emotion as we each took our turns opening presents.
At one point, my niece went up to her to give her a hug and say thank you for the present.
Mom had very little response; she didn't hug her back and seemed confused as to why she was hugging her and what she was saying to her.
The only time she showed any emotion to any present opened was when dad opened the laundry detergent that he had given her.
Dad knew that mom had picked out something bizarre for him; he had been anticipating what it was for days.
We all huddled around him as he opened the present and directed mom's attention to dad.
As dad opened his present, to find Gain laundry detergent, he had sheer amusement on his face.
We were all chuckling and finding the humor in the situation.
Dad looked at mom and said, "Thanks dear.
I need this."
Mom sat slightly forward in her seat on the couch and, waving her finger towards the laundry soap, told him very seriously, "Yeah, that's why I got you that, yeah.
I know you like that."
"Perfect.
Absolutely perfect," dad said, trying to contain the chuckles.
For as long as I can remember, my dad has always filled out his gift tags to mom using pet names.
In fact, they both did it.
They would write things such as: "To Mrs. Claus, from Mr. Claus" or "To Dee, From Guess Who" or "To Toots, From Sancho" (don't know if I spelled Toots right).
I always thought it was cute that they "spiced" it up and made it fun.
This year, mom was confused with the tags on the gifts dad gave.
"Huh?
What do you mean, Guess Who?
What?
Who is this for?
Why does it say this, Guess Who?"
or "Toots, what?
I don't know what this means."
When she opened her gifts, she wasn't overly excited and she was sometimes a bit confused at what she was receiving.
I had to explain to her several times that the skirts she opened from me were made by me, as she's been hounding me for months about making her skirts, "I don't know why you won't ever make me any skirts, you're so talented.
I wish you would make me some skirts."
She seemed to like the skirts, though she wasn't overly enthusiastic as she has been in years past.
By the time the rest of the extended family showed up (near 1:00), mom was ready for a nap.
She was concerned about people coming over during naptime, but dad kept reiterating that it was Christmas and that people would be over to celebrate.
That's what we do for holidays.
She went back to her room alone, making no exception for the holiday.
I don't know what the future holds; will we be able to have large gatherings next year?
Only time will tell.
Based on her detachment and disinterest this year, my guess is that by next year, the holidays will be meaningless to her.
I look ahead to next Christmas with dread.
I don't know how we will make it through.
As sad and disheartening as it was for our family this year, I know the road ahead will only get rougher.
I suppose my goal for the New Year is to figure out how to cope and manage the despair that comes with losing a loved one.  
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 21, 2012>
Today's memoir of Deana comes from the daughter of her oldest brother, her niece Patricia.
I couldn't find a picture of the two of them together, but I found one of Patricia in her teenage years, which pertains to this post.
Enjoy!
-------------------------------------------------------------------------- My aunt Deana was like a second mother to me in my tormented, drama-filled teenaged years.
For some reason, when I hit age 12, my parents were no longer cool anymore, and that's where my aunt Deana came in.
She is only 14 years older than I, and in my young teenage mind, she was cool, hip, pretty, and young.
She used to talk to me all about her teenage years regarding boys, and to my boy-crazy mind, it was fun trading stories.
She was still so young at heart, and it made all the difference in having a confidant to share things with.
I used to spend most of my entire summer vacations at her house, and even some of the weekends, when I felt it was "getting too heated" at my own home.
Or, sometimes, when my Aunt Deana wanted to go on a hot date with my Uncle Bud, she would come pick me up to babysit on a Friday night, and I would stay there the entire weekend.
My aunt Deana always helped me re-ground myself amongst all the teenage drama, and I loved spending as much time with her as I could.
It was a win-win situation for us both.
Like most mothers, she was stressed out with raising her children, and needed help.
I needed an escape from my drama-filled teenaged years at home.
So, I would come help her babysit, clean house, and we would generally just be each other's good friend and companion during those times.
Like Cassandra, I also remember her keeping an immaculate home.
I always helped her every morning to sweep and mop the kitchen, clean the bathrooms, vacuum, and other household chores.
What was fun during these times was when she would turn on MTV (back in the day when MTV actually had music videos) and we would rock out to Martika or some other crazy 80's band while cleaning the house.
She used to grab the mop from me and dance around with me in the kitchen.
Oh, what fun that was!
I remember one time when "Sweet Child O' Mine" by Guns N' Roses came on, she grabbed the mop, pretended it was her microphone, and sung at the top of her lungs.
High-pitched Axl Rose voice, and all!
She was so fun, full of life, and best of all, silly!
As Cassandra mentioned, her mom was a fabulous cook.
She also helped me learn to make my own peach pie when I was 12 years old.
Peach pie was a tradition in her family every summer, and after she taught me how to make it, I would come over every summer, and we would make them together.
I will always love and cherish those times as we grew closer together in our relationship.
Plus, making peach pie and rocking out to Guns N' Roses on the TV.........what is not to like and love about that?
See?
Didn't I tell you my Aunt was young, hip, and cool?
Also, she helped me learn to cook as we made dinner together every night when I stayed there.
She always had to have dinner on the table in time for when my Uncle Bud was coming home.
Another summer tradition was going to Knott's Berry Farm.
Because of all the help I gave my aunt during the summer, she always paid my way into Knott's.
This was a real treat because we grew up poor in my family, so trips to amusement parks were not usually something we ever did.
I remember screaming and laughing with her on some of the scarier roller coasters, and when we'd get off them, she'd say, "That was totally awesome!" As Cassandra mentioned, there was nothing she couldn't talk about with her mom.
It was the same with me.
I truly believe because my aunt was there to hear and listen to me without judgment, that she saved me from making some really stupid mistakes in my teenage years.
As a teenager, I didn't feel as if I had anyone to turn to in my moments of drama and angst, and she was always there to pick me up and help me move forward.
I will forever be grateful to her for that, and I hope to be the same kind of Auntie to my own nieces and nephews when they need someone to confide in.
She always struck the perfect balance of everything in her life, and religion was no exception.
This was a rock to me as a teenager to see how someone could be hip, cool, and religious at the same time.
She was always a shining example of someone strong in her faith and religion.
This example shined so bright to me when she used to attend church all on her own with her three small children.
Week after week she did this without fail for several years, and she never gave up the faith.
I truly will always admire her for her rock-solid faith and dedication.
When I later got married and moved out of state, I really missed having my aunt nearby.
The homesickness I had for her and my own mom (she was cool again by then) and everyone else I loved was very acute.
It was always such a welcome joy to come home to California to see my beloved family, and seeing my sweet Aunt Deana again during these times always made my day.
As more time and years went on, visits became fewer and far between.
This past November, it had been a year since I saw her last, and I had the chance to come home for Thanksgiving .
Gone was the young, hip, cool, Auntie I loved and adored.
In her place, was a debilitating disease called dementia.
It was a complete and total shock for me to see how far she had gone down in so short a time because I was still able to have somewhat normal conversations with her a year prior to that time.
After my visit with her, when she could no longer see me, I broke down into sobs as we drove away from her home.
I knew the Aunt I had loved and adored all those years was gone, at least in this life.
I mourned my Aunt's loss the rest of that day, but later was able to come to the conclusion that she is still there.
Her mind may be gone, but she is still there!
Her spirit is alive and well!
Someday in the next life, she will be whole again.
What a day that will be when we are all whole again, and reunited forever!
I hugged her extra tight that day before I left, and I cannot wait to do so again the next time I see her.
Dementia may take a lot from us and our loved ones suffering through it, but it cannot take away our love and memories.
In my mind, she will always remain my young, hip, cool, and pretty Aunt.
I love you so very much, Aunt Deana!
Thank you for helping me become who I am today.
I know I would have had some serious dark times without your love and support!
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 18, 2012>
***SPOILER ALERT: TO MY DAD-YOU MAY WANT TO READ THIS AFTER CHRISTMAS, AS IT MAY SPOIL YOUR CHRISTMAS SURPRISES!
*** My kids always get so excited at Christmas time.
It goes without saying that they love to get presents.
But they also love to GIVE presents.
It is so hard for them to contain their excitement and patiently wait for us to open up whatever Christmas surprise they come up with for us.
And we never know what we will get.
One year, my daughter made me a necklace of mismatched beads on a strand of yarn.
Every single day for 2 entire weeks before Christmas, she begged me to open it.
She just knew it was a gift I would love!
I wore it with pride.
Many times, the kids will find treasures from their room that they will wrap up and give to us as gifts (I have a few of those under my tree right now!)
I love their sweet innocence and the pride they have when they give us these gifts from the heart.
Last year, I went shopping with my mom to help her pick out Christmas gifts for all of the grandkids.
She has always been great at picking out gifts on her own, but for obvious reasons she needed a little extra help.
This year, she hasn't said much about gifts at all with the exception of once or twice when she told me "I need you to tell me what your children might like for Christmas."
I knew it would be difficult for her to understand and pick out gifts on her own, even if I made a list and even if I was there with her.
So last week, I took my dad (instead) shopping for Christmas presents for all of the grandkids and other family members.
As I wrapped and placed all of the presents under their tree, I realized that one person did not have any gifts under the tree: my dad.
All of us kids got presents for dad, but for the first time I can remember, mom hadn't picked anything out for him.
Not that dad would care; he has always been the kind to think of others and never himself.
Whenever we ask what he wants for Christmas, his reply is always the same, "I don't need anything.
Save it for the kids; it's about them."
Yesterday, when I was over at my mom's for the day, I asked her what she had gotten for dad for Christmas.
She said that she had gone out shopping with my Aunt Claudia and got him something...I hate to write what it is, in case my dad did not follow directions and is reading this blog!
But suffice it to say that it is something she buys frequently, which he would wear, so it is somewhat "routine" for her.
I suggested we go out after lunch to Kmart (we didn't have much time between lunchtime and naptime to go anywhere father than Kmart, which is up the street) to pick out a few more things for dad.
Surprisingly, she agreed.
I felt good; I was happy that I was able to convince her to get out and help her shop for dad!
I didn't know how this would go, but I figured I would be able to find some things that I knew dad would like and be able to influence her on what to get.
I couldn't have been more wrong.
As we walked in the store, mom decided we should walk through every aisle and see what was there that he might like.
We started at the beginning; although mom decided we could skip the card aisle because she didn't need to get him one of those.
In the middle of the walkways were displays of colognes and body gels.
I asked her if she thought he might like some cologne.
It took me a couple of times of asking her before it registered to her that I was talking.
"Huh?
Colo-what?
I don't know what that is.
I don't know what you're saying about that."
I explained to her that it was the stuff you put on your body to make it smell good.
She buys her body fragrances at Bath & Body Works...would she like to get dad some fragrances for himself?
I pointed out sets of aftershave, gel and cologne.
She seemed to look through what I was pointing at and instead of answering or acknowledging me, continued her search on the shelf for something more familiar to her that he would like.
We made our way to the candy section, where there were several displays of holiday treats.
Mom kept talking about "that one kind of candy thing" that dad always liked.
I asked her to tell me what it looked like, what is tasted like as I tried to figure out what she was talking about, but to no avail.
She knew there was something that dad liked, but she couldn't quite figure out what that was.
I picked up a box of Good 'n Plenty candies along with a box of Jujifruits.
Those of 2 of dad's favorites; surely mom would recognize those!
As I held them in front of her, she squinted her eyes and shook her head as she stuttered, "No, no I'm not getting him that.
I don't know what that is...I don't know that he would like that...I've never known that he likes that...that's not familiar to me..." Despite my attempts to assure her that these were dad's favorites and that they would be perfect for his stocking, mom could not be convinced.
I let out a sigh as I tossed the boxes of candies in my cart; if I had to buy them myself, dad would have them for his stocking.
As we continued aisle after aisle of candy and food, we ran into the sausage displays.
This was sure to spark her memory!
I remember every year, growing up, mom would buy dad some sausage for his stocking.
She remembers the past so well...I was sure she'd know to buy him the sausage.
Mom did not recognize what I was showing her.
"Mom, you used to buy this every year for dad...he loves it!
He would love it if you got it for him.
You could wrap it and put it under the tree," I said, over and over.
It was as if I wasn't even talking.
She plugged along down the next aisle, me following behind, waving the sausage at her, when she suddenly stopped in front of the display of Goldfish crackers.
"He really likes these fishy things too, he eats them with all the kids too.
He would like this," she said, as she tried to make a choice between regular flavor, or extra cheddar.
I couldn't help but to chuckle.
"You want to get him goldfish crackers for Christmas?"
I asked with amusement.
"Yeah he would really like it, he really likes them," she said, as she tossed them into the cart.
"What else do you want to get for him, mom?"
I asked, as she led me through the next aisle.
We were heading towards the household cleaning products; surely there was nothing up for gift considerations and we could pass through those aisles.
I tried to redirect her down another path and turned to make my way towards the right section of the store.
But mom is fast.
I turned around and she was gone.
I knew she couldn't have gone far.
I called her name, in vain, because she didn't answer me.
I found her in the laundry detergent aisle, seemingly intent on something.
"They don't have that kind-the kind for the special kind that I have to buy...with those letters on it."
I knew what she meant.
I led her to the other side of the aisle where the Gain 'he' (high efficiency) detergent sat on the shelves.
She became excited and declared, "Oh yes, oh good, they have it.
Your dad really likes this one so much 'cuz it washes his work clothes so good too."
I wrinkled my eyebrows and looked at her as I tried to make sense of what she was saying.
"Mom, you don't mean that you are getting that for dad for Christmas, do you?"
"Huh?"
I rephrased the question, "Mom, is that what you want to get dad for a Christmas present?"
"Yes I am, this is what he likes.
I know he'll really like this too 'cuz it washes his clothes so good."
I tried to reason with her and suggest that you don't buy your husband a bottle of laundry detergent for Christmas.
But mom would hear no reason.
She was adamant that dad would love to receive laundry detergent for Christmas.
As she put the detergent in the cart, and we walked around the store a little more, I found a couple other things (in addition to his favorite candies) that I put into the cart, with several attempts at explaining why she should get these particular items for dad (mostly because it was something that I knew he would like).
The answers were always the same, "No, I'm not gonna get that, no.
I don't know what that is...I'm confused at what that is...I don't know that he would like that."
She tried explaining to me something else that she wanted to add to his gifts.
"Those things you use, you put in the thing at the computer that you...with your hand," she explained, wiggling her hands in the air, "that you use with computer things too to make it work...you put it in things to make it work, your dad always needs those things too..." Somehow I figured out that she was describing batteries.
She wanted to get dad batteries.
We walked around the store, looking for a section with batteries and before I could catch up with her, she ran ahead to the man behind the cash register in electronics (who was helping another lady check out) and tried to explain the things she was looking for.
He looked very confused, as did the lady checking out, and as I approached my mom, I gently put my arm around her and explained to the cashier that she was looking for batteries.
He looked at her and in some detail told her exactly where to go to find batteries.
Mom hastily interrupted him and said, "What?
Register 10, what?
I'm confused at what you're talking about, my brain is so stupid.
Because of that surgery which left my brain stupid, I don't know what you're saying."
It always chokes me up to hear her call herself stupid and watch her struggle to realize that she cannot comprehend what others are telling her.
I patted her back and told her it was okay, I knew where the batteries were.
I led her to the front of the store, to Register 10, where we picked out a pack of batteries and took our place in line.
As we checked out with the cashier at the end of a very long hour, I was able to sneak the candy and another little item in with her selected gifts, with the intention of her using them for stocking stuffers.
I was fully prepared to buy them myself if she threw a fit, but after much fuss she finally agreed on adding those 3 small things, with the condition that, "Well then I'm gonna tell him when he opens it that you told me to get it, 'cuz I don't know that he likes that stuff."
I just laughed and said, "Okay mom, you can blame it all on me."
We drove home at 1:12 (which, she made sure to remind me, was way past her naptime) and went into the house where she immediately dumped the batteries, goldfishies, candy, and the other small item, into a gift bag which was behind the tree.
(It also had the other gift she bought him the other day).
She threw the plastic bag on top of the items, folded the top of the bag over in half, and stuffed it behind the Christmas tree.
I reminded her that the candy was for his stocking, to which she replied, "What?
Stocking, what?
I don't know what you're saying, stocking."
I let it go.
It wasn't important anyway.
What was important was that she had found him a gift.
Maybe it's a bottle of laundry detergent and a pack of batteries.
But they were gifts that she picked out, that she felt he would love.
I'm not sure how he will react when he opens up his gifts.
He might laugh.
He might cry.
He might do both.
I know I certainly felt both reactions.
But I also marvel at the childlike innocence that my mom possesses.
It was a humbling reminder to me that Christmas is not about the fancy gifts or the shiny red bows.
Christmas is about giving from the heart.
My mom with dementia helped me to remember that this Christmas season.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 7, 2012>
For today's "Remembering Deana" segment, you are stuck hearing from me ;) I figure I oughta write down my own memoirs of my mom, even though I share tidbits here and there.
Plus...other people needed some extra time to get back to me with their writings.
----------------------------------------------------------------------- Everything I ever needed to know, I learned from my mom.
Whether she ever realized it or not, my mom taught me so many valuable life lessons, both through word and through deed.
My mom kept an immaculate house.
She made sure to teach her children how to keep an immaculate house, too!
Each week we had our chore that we were responsible for (bathroom, living room, kitchen).
It was our job to keep that area of the house cleaned up daily and to deep clean it on Saturdays.
At the time, we moaned and groaned about it.
When I went away to college, and had 5 roommates and weekly "clean checks" at our off-campus apartment, I was grateful for the skills that my mother taught me.
I am grateful now that I have my own household, that I know how to keep a clean house.
Okay...a somewhat clean house.
I'm doing the best I can with 5 kids.
I honestly don't know how my mom did it!!
Thank you, mom,  for  teaching me the value of hard work and how to keep a clean house.
My mom was a great cook.
She taught us the importance of eating a balanced meal and made sure we had a healthy dinner on the table every night, which-I might add-we ate ALL TOGETHER.
We rarely ate fast food.
Mom wanted to keep us healthy.
This was another very useful skill that I took with me when I went away to school, as well as when I got married and had a family.
Thank you, mom, for teaching me how to cook and for also teaching me the value of eating together and connecting as a family.
My mom was talented.
She made beautiful cakes.
I remember my siblings and I would cringe when we went to friend's birthday parties and their cakes were store bought (I know, we were cake snobs!).
That was unthinkable in our household.
My mom, who learned from her mom, made every single birthday cake as well as our wedding cakes.
Even with twins, she made sure we each had our own, special cake for our birthday.
She began teaching me how to decorate cakes when I was a young girl.
When I was 13, she let me venture on my own and my best friend and I decorated the numbers "1" and "3" for my and my brother's cake.
When I became a mom, my mom was there by my side guiding me and directing me on how to make my children their own birthday cakes.
Thank you, mom, for sharing your talent with me.
My mom valued family traditions.
The holidays were always a great time for us.
Every year, my mom would have a Christmas baking day and make all kinds of yummy Christmas goodies, passing them out to friends and neighbors.
I loved helping her bake, especially at Christmas time.
Friends and neighbors always looked forward to her treats as well, especially the English Toffee.
This is a tradition that I have kept with my own children, and cherish very much.
Thank you, mom, for passing down family traditions that I can carry on with my children.
My mom was fun.
She liked to go to amusement parks, water parks and take us on camping trips and vacations.
She liked to be silly and try to make us laugh (especially when we were grumpy!)
I remember many a times when mom would turn the music on her stereo full blast while we were cleaning or baking, and singing and shaking to the beat.
Sometimes, when I was little, she would take me by the hands and have me dance with her.
My friends thought my mom was fun, too.
I remember when she started working at my elementary school.
She was the "nice" supervisor.
I was proud that my mom worked there and even more proud that she was one of the favorites on the playground.
Mom kept her fun spirit as I grew into a teenager.
I remember feeling pride in the fact that my parents were young  and fun.
She loved to joke around and she liked to *try* and be funny.
Some  things were not as funny as others.
One morning, she was driving my friends and me to school.
Our high school was in a rough neighborhood, full of low-riders who blared their car stereos at deafening volumes.
It was quite annoying.
Thinking she would make something comical of it, mom  lowered her carseat, slouched down, rolled down the windows and turned up her stereo full-volume.
Her music of choice?
Oldies.
I remember shrinking down in my seat, begging her to turn it down, but deep down I was laughing and thought she was pretty funny.
Thank you, mom, for having a sense of humor and for being fun.
My mom was open-minded and had open communication with her children.
There was nothing we couldn't talk about with our mom.
Sometimes it could get embarrassing, as my brother asked some far out questions about sex (things he had heard from kids at school).
Mom, though reserved, always answered our questions and was always there to talk when we needed her.
She made it clear that, no matter how embarrassing it was to talk about something, that she wanted us to come to her.
Anytime I had a problem that I needed advice for, or even someone to share happy news with, mom was there to listen.
Thank you, mom, for listening to your children and for teaching me how to have good communication with my own children.
My mom was religious.
She had a deep faith in God and in His son, Jesus Christ.
She took us to church every single week; even in my younger days when my dad was "less active" and did not attend church regularly with us.
My mom faithfully took us, every week, despite our embarrassing and sometimes unruly behavior.
Mom taught us to love and have faith in our Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ.
She taught us how to pray and how to build our faith and testimonies of the gospel of Jesus Christ.
She taught us the importance of going to church and serving others there.
Thank you, mom, for living your faith and teaching us through your example.
My mom was supportive.
Her children were her first priority.
She was at every award's assembly, every spelling bee, every piano recital and every choir concert.
I remember her chaperoning almost every field trip we took in elementary school.
She was always the class mom and there for every school party.
When I was in high school, she did her best to be at every home swim meet that we had (by that time she was working in the afternoons as a Head Start Aide, so sometimes she was late to my meets).
She was always there to greet us at home after dates or nights out with friends.
She was there for the births of all her grandchildren (except the grandbaby in Florida; she went after the birth).
Some of my favorite memories were when my mom came up to visit me at college (a 16 hour drive away from home) for our college's annual "Mother's Week".
I think this was the time when I really grew closest to my mom.
Going away to college, at 17 years old, made me realize how much I loved and appreciated my parents.
And even though I was having the time of my life, I missed them terribly.
Mom really began to become more of my friend during this time and I loved to spend time with her.
I remembering counting down the days until it was time for mom to come up for Mother's Week.
During that week, she would go to my classes with me, take me out to dinners and shopping (which was a big treat for a "starving student"!, attend college events (including our fashion show that I was a part of), and she took the time to get to know all of my friends that I had made while away at school.
It was truly a wonderful time of bonding with my mom and it brings tears to my eyes to think back and remember these special times.
These are memories that I will always hold dear to my heart.
Thank you, mom, for always putting us first and supporting everything we were a part of.
My mom was many things; this is just the tip of the iceberg.
These are some of the things I love most about my mom; some of the things I miss most about my mom.
Thank you, mom, for teaching me everything I needed to know to be the wife, the mother and the friend that I am today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------- If you have a memoir you'd like to contribute for my Friday feature of "Remembering Deana", please contact me.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, December 6, 2012>
You all know the famous saying, "Money doesn't grow on trees."
My mom used to say it to me when I was a kid, no doubt her mom said it to her, and I find myself saying it to my kids.
Sometimes it seems that my kids really do believe that I have a tree right in my backyard that I can go pick money off of whenever they want something!!
"Just use your card," my youngest daughter once told me.
I can remember saying something similar to my mom,  "Just write a check!"
At that age, kids have no concept that there has to be actual money behind the check (or the card) to pay for it!
As a person with dementia regresses back into a childlike phase, they begin to lose their concept of money.
A person who may have once been very frugal (before dementia) now might hand out $100 bills to total strangers!
No joke!
My mom isn't handing out hundred dollar bills (yet), but when it comes to money, I am finding it even more difficult to teach her the concept than my own children.
I suppose that is because, while both are childlike, a child is teachable; a person with dementia is not.
When I was growing up, my mom was very frugal.
I well remember her cutting coupons for groceries and allowing us to shop for clothes from the sale racks only.
My sister and I both took piano lessons, and my brother played baseball for while, but whenever we asked for anything else extracirricular, mom always said we didn't have "the money."
When we were in high school, mom made us pay for half of our sports "sprit" packs and we were expected to earn our own money, through hard work and fundraisers, for other extracirricular wants (such as our madgrials tours across the US, etc).
Looking back, and talking with my dad about it in hindsight, mom was just being a penny pincher.
Although as an adult, I very much appreciate the fact that she taught us about hard work.
Those are values I instill in my children as well.
But she was a bit tight and kept herself on a very strict budget.
Mom paid all the bills and was very organized in her method of bill pay by keeping a notebook where she would write every bill for the month, the amount due and when it was paid.
My dad never had to worry about the bills being paid and really never worried about how much money was in the bank; my mom took excellent care of that.
He just worked and brought the money home.
Since dementia, my mom has lost all frugality.
For the past several months, my mom has been rapidly losing her concept of money.
At some point, my dad took over the finances and transferred the money into the family account (which mom has access to) when needed.
When the bills were continually being paid late, if at all, dad began resuming the role of paying the bills.
Mom is constantly asking people to take her to the JC Penney Outlet, because "they have really good clothes things for really cheap."
About middle of this year, my dad, who is self-employed, had a little dry spell with work.
Obviously, with no money coming in, money was extremely tight.
There was no room to frivolously spend money on things that were not necessary.
Yet mom would ask, day after day, for someone to take her to the JC Penney Outlet or to Kohl's with the coupons she had received in the mail.
We continuously tried explaining to her that there was no money to be spent.
She'd get a confused look on her face, furrow her brow and say, "No, it's not really expensive.
It's really cheap too and I have the good coupon things from the mail too."
Again, we told her that dad was not working and he had no income coming in; she could not spend money that was no necessary.
"No, it's okay.
I have really good coupon things too and I can use the credit card thing too," she'd reply.
"Mom, you have to have money to pay the credit card," I'd argue back.
"No it's fine.
It's not due for a really long time...a month or more so I'm fine.
I can put it on the credit card."
No matter how much I (or anyone else) would try to explain to her that there is NO work lined up and all spending is on a temporary freeze (even with credit cards), she could not connect the dots.
These conversations still come up on a monthly, sometimes weekly, basis.
Since summer time, she has started receiving a little bit of money from work disability.
When she gets that check in the mail, she thinks she's hit the jackpot!
She wastes no time in calling me, or someone else, to con us into taking her to the bank.
On a few occassions, she has even planned to hide the check from my dad so he wouldn't know the money came.
It seems she had plans of her own for the money!
None of these plans ever involve paying the bills; this is "her" money.
When the issues of bills come up, the response is, "Well your dad hasn't given me money yet to go to the store....[or] to pay the bill."
Just last week she received a check in the mail, and when I asked her if she wanted me to take her to the grocery store, she said that my dad had not given her money yet to go to the store.
The best way to handle this is to take preventative measures on their spending.
Yes, we know that we need to set up automatic bill pay so she never sees the check.
It's on the "to do" list.
Yes, my dad needs to file power of attorney with the bank and make some notes on the account banning her from withdrawing large amounts of money.
An allowance would be another good solution for a person with dementia.
In her book, Susan Scarff shared that she traded her husband's large bills (that he once used to carry in his wallet, pre-dementia) with $1 bills.
She limited the amount he had in his wallet.
When he handed them out to strangers, it was not a big loss, and he didn't know the difference between large and small bills.
[If you want to read her book, you can order it directly from this link, it is a must read if you have not read it!!]
My mom can still count money and knows the difference between large and small bills, but eventually that knowledge will fade as well.
Indeed, when it comes to money, you must treat a person with dementia as you would treat your small child.
There is no way to teach a person with dementia that money does not grow on trees.  
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 4, 2012>
When the realization set in that my mom would be unable to go back to work in her current state of mind (in the fall of '11), my dad began seeking assistance to supplement her income, such as disability or Social Security.
Trying to obtain Social Security has been an absolute headache for my dad.
When he first applied for social security, late last year, we had no definitive diagnosis for my mom.
She had had a CT Scan by her network neurologist, who stated that there was shrinkage in the frontotemporal lobes of the brain, but he reassured my parents that it was NOT dementia or Alzheimer's.
We were left with many unanswered questions and chalked it up to brain damage from her surgery.
(You can read the full timeline here).
One thing was clear: she was no longer able to fulfill her duties as a HeadStart teacher.
My dad applied for Social Security and sought out the neurologist to sign a form for disability.
For months, he was given the runaround.
The neurologist directed him to her primary doctor.
After waiting for an appointment with the primary doctor, the doctor directed dad back to the neurologist.
They told him to go to a psychiatrist who then pointed him back to the other set of doctors.
He got second opinions from other primary doctors and neurologists...bottom line: nobody wanted to take responsibility to sign her disability forms.
It was an absolute nightmare!!
At one point, social security provided their own doctor to come and assess mom (I believe that was early this year, around January, before her diagnosis, but possibly at the end of last year).
Their doctor concluded that she was "fine" and they didn't see anything out of the norm with her.
I want to know exactly what kind of doctors they hire!!!!
Do they even have a medical degree??
It doesn't take a rocket scientist to see that mom is unable to function on a higher level-even back then.
At any rate, she was denied social security and told that they could appeal her case.
Dad finally hired a social security lawyer.
He filed for a waiver, I believe before we had a diagnosis.
I'm a little fuzzy on the timeframe of all of this, as it was one big headache.
But by March, she had her diagnosis and they were able to submit that to the judge.
And then the waiting began.
Dad was told that he could be waiting up to 18 months for a court date.
Can you imagine??
In one of my support groups that I belong to, some other group members informed me of a "compassionate allowance" with social security.
Basically, if a person's illness falls under one of the listed categories of illnesses, they have the right to a speedier process, foregoing the many hoops that one must go through to obtain social security.
On the list are many forms of dementia, including frontotemporal lobe dementia.
I saw the light at the end of the tunnel!
I gave my dad this information (this was during the summer...around June or July) and he took it back to the attorney.
They acted as if they weren't sure what he was talking about.
I researched the social security website myself and sent the links to my dad to forward to the attorney.
By August, my dad received a notice in the mail that he had a court date: December.
We were disappointed that it was so far away, yet we knew it could be far worse (at least the date wasn't a year away!)
We were frustrated because, given the compassion allowance, she was eligible to see the judge in a matter of weeks rather than months or years.
Again, my dad took the information and sent letters and updated paperwork from UCLA over to the attorney.
They said that they would "look into it".
This was end of August/beginning of September.
My dad never heard back from the attorney about the compassionate allowance.
By October, I decided to take matters into my own hands and help my dad out.
It's been difficult for him to stay on top of all the phone calls and paperwork, as he has a job away from home, as well as many duties he's had to assume in the home.
I called social security myself, with the same outcome that my dad had: waiting on hold for an hour at a time, only to be told that the can't give me any information about my mom's case due to the fact that she had an attorney.
After several phone calls, and a lot of wasted time on hold, I felt defeated.
I called my dad to report the outcome.
He told me that the attorney told him that they actually could give me information about her case, they just don't want to be bothered.
This tidbit of information relit my fire!
I immediately got back on the phone, ready to fight with the last operator who had been extremely rude and unhelpful.
I asked for supervisor and got his secretary.
I left a message for the supervisor and for the first time, I felt like I had reached someone who actually listened and sympathized with my position.
She assured me she would give him the message and tell him it was urgent to call me back.
Half an hour later, I received a call from the supervisor who very willingly gave me all of the information I needed.
I asked him about the compassionate allowance (which, by the way, none of the other social security phone operators knew a thing about) and he agreed with me that her diagnosis fell under the compassionate allowance.
He pulled up the paperwork that was submitted by the attorney and read it to me and together we concluded that the likely reason that they did not qualify her immediately for the compassionate allowance was because of the wording in the letter.
They used the proper term for her illness, "semantic dementia", which is a form of frontotemporal lobe dementia, rather than using the term "frontotemporal lobe dementia".
They most likely did not realize that semantic dementia fell under the frontotemporal lobe dementia category.
He told me that if I could get another letter from UCLA stating that semantic dementia was in fact FTD, that he would be more than willing to file it electronically himself, saving me the headache of having to go through the attorney.
Afterall, this was the attorney's job to investigate in the first place!
Somebody didn't do their job.
By the time we were able to obtain another letter from UCLA and file it with social security, we were only weeks away from our December 3rd courtdate with social security.
But we now had the evidence filed that she does qualify for the compassionate allowance as well as the benefits, and that was a comfort.
After months and months (over a year) of dealing with this nightmare, my mom finally had her day in court yesterday.
Even though we had all of the proof and evidence we needed to win the case, I was still a little nervous about how they would rule.
Would they take the time to read the papers and understand her illness?
We had been through so many hoops to get to this point; I was praying that we would not face anymore setbacks.
Less than an hour after she was due for her hearing, I received a phone call from my dad.
They won the case!!
He filled me in on the happenings of the hearing.
They met with the lawyer for some time before the actual hearing, to review all of the information.
The established that mom was not driving, per doctor's orders.
My dad informed them that we have people coming over a few days a week to supervise her and make sure she is safe.
After that, they brought mom and dad into the courtroom before the judge.
They talked to my mom and told her that she needed to be sworn in.
Mom looked back at them with a blank expression.
They tried to explain to her again that she needed to take the oath and be sworn into the court.
Mom did not understand what they were trying to tell her.
My dad said they spent the next 10 minutes trying to explain to my mom what it meant to be sworn in and tell the truth, and she just was not getting it.
The judge looked at her and asked, "Would it be the truth to say I'm wearing a blue robe?"
Mom responded with, "No it looks black to me."
He tried again, "Would it be the truth to say that you are a blonde?"
Mom answered again, "I'm not a blonde, I'm a redhead."
After several questions, I think it became apparent that mom was not understanding what was being asked.
They simply were not able to swear her in.
Finally, the judge said, "I don't have any questions for her."
For a moment, my dad was a little confused and I think worried that they were not going to hear the case.
But after some court verbage between the judge and attorney, the attorney came back to my dad and said they had won the case and they should be receiving the final notification in the mail within a month.
What a sigh of relief!
There is still much work to be done, but this opens to the door to many more possibilities.
My next step is to try and qualify her for Medi-cal (this can be done 30 days after she receives social security) and then get her onto a county program that provides assistance throughout the day.
We are one step closer!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 30, 2012>
This post was written by my Uncle Jeff, my mom's brother.
-------------------------------------------------------------------- Deana and I were the closest in age of 5 children at 2 years apart.
Our birthdays were a week apart with Deana's following mine.
Mom many times would make us one cake for both birthdays so compromise was always needed because Deana always wanted Chocolate cake and ice cream and I usually wanted Strawberry, Deana also hated coconut and I loved it.
Mom would usually do half and half on the cake to satisfy our differences.
Since we were so close in age Deana and I did a lot together when we were younger.
I can remember a time when Deana did not eat her vegetables and didn't get dessert so I snuck her some of mine.
As she crawled under the table to my chair I spoon fed her some of my dessert when no one was looking.
I remember a time also when we went to Stater Brothers Market in Rubidoux Ca.
I saw Deana chewing some Bazooka gum and wondering where she got it from she admitted to me she took a piece from the supermarket bin and began chewing it.
I felt the need to rat her out for "stealing" the gum and told dad.
Dad made her go up front to pay for it.
I followed Deana up to the register where she had to "confess" her sins.
She simply went up front with her penny to pay for the gum and handed it to the checker and said "this is for some gum that I am already chewing".
Wow, here I thought she was going to have to confess she took the gum but I had been out witted!
I remember another Super Market story, this one happened at Michaels Market in Glen Avon where we grew up.
We entered the produce section and we were blowing air out of straws over the avocadoes that in those days sat in saw dust, it was cool watching the saw dust scatter.
Deana rather than only exhaling made an inhale and sucked saw dust into her throat.
She started choking and dad immediately grabbed her and I think even flipped her upside down and reached into her throat with his finger and scooped out the saw dust.
Whew dad saved my sister!
Last story for now but Deana and I were walking to a friend's house that took us to primary, a weekly church activity function for children.
I was into the 'playing with matches' stage of my life and liked flicking them off the match book with my finger and watch them flare up then extinguish as they flung through the air.
We were behind the market near a canal and I was doing my flinging!
Next thing I know a man stops his car and yells to Deana and me to "Help stamp out this fire"!
I had not even noticed my match didn't go out and started the field on fire behind us.
Some quick stamping and a disaster had been averted and we finished our walk to our friend's home for our ride!
I do not know why the man didn't interrogate me as to how the fire started but so glad I didn't get busted any further.
Deana has an outstanding memory of many past events and even in her dementia she seems to recall events I barely remember or do not remember at all.
It seems so odd to me how certain things remain and others vanish completely from memory.
When Deana visited me in the summer of 2012 she didn't even know what a scrabble game was and said she has never played 'that game' yet she use to play it all the time especially when camping at Heart Bar camp ground.
I showed her how to play and at first she wanted to play turn after turn like a crossword puzzle and not let me have my turn until she finally got it and we actually took turns.
Eventually however when words were getting harder to find she immediately abandoned the game and got up and left the table.
I felt this was the very few moments where I had actually connected with her for a small period of time during her stay.
I am grateful to have so many memories and will have to share more later!
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- If you have a memoir you would like to write about my mom for my Friday features, please contact me.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 27, 2012>
Holidays have always been a big production in our family.
Both my dad and my mom grew up in large families, with 4 and 5 siblings each.
Our holidays were an entire family affair: aunts, uncles, cousins, grandparents... And the food?
The food was never anything less than amazing!
I've said it before-my grandma was a magnificent cook, winning many awards for her recipes and cooking skills.
She passed those skills onto her children, including my mom.
When we got together for holidays, particularly Thanksgiving, it was a heavenly feast.
My mom ruled the kitchen and every holiday feast was magnificent.
Since I've gotten married, we alternate years on where we spend Thanksgiving between my family and my husband's family.
This year was our year to spend with my family.
As I reflected about the upcoming holiday and particularly the changes this year with my mom, I realized just how long it's been since I've had a "normal" Thanksgiving with her.
Last year, we were with my in-laws.
The year before that, it was Thanksgiving at my house with my parents and my dad's side of the family.
And even then, mom was already "changing".
She made a couple of pies that year, but somehow she couldn't get them quite right and they weren't as tasty as they used to be.
The year before that: in-laws.
Year before that, my brother got married over Thanksgiving break in Florida and my parents flew out and spent the holiday with him.
It's probably been a good 6 years since we've had a Thanksgiving with my family with my mom in her normal form.
Thanksgiving this year was bittersweet.
Sweet because my brother and his family were coming in to celebrate with us, but bitter because of the changes with my mom.
In the weeks prior to Thanksgiving, I had many anxieties and concerns regarding my mom.
Would she remember what Thanksgiving is?
Would she engage with the family, or would she throw a fit to stay at home?
Would she be able to at least help in preparing any of the food?
Last year, my sister and dad reported that my mom was not interested in preparing food for Thanksgiving.
In fact, my dad had made a joke that they were going to a restaurant instead of the usual feast (blasphemy in our family!)
and as my dad pulled out the turkey to prep, mom said, "I thought we were going to a restaurant."
Once she figured out that my dad and sister were making the usual Thanksgiving feast, mom was in the kitchen, peeking over their shoulders and telling them what they were doing wrong.
"My mom always taught me to do it this way," she said, over and over as my dad prepared the turkey, the potatoes, the vegetables, and instructing them on how to prepare the food properly.
I wondered if this would be the case again this year.
As annoying as it was to have her hovering and correcting, at least she was aware and familiar with our traditional holiday foods.
Mom has not made any mention of the holidays this year.
Even as we coordinated food assignments, I knew mom would not be involved.
A few days before Thanksgiving, I asked her if she knew what holiday was coming up.
After several promptings, she figured out that it was "that one holiday thing where you eat that certain food" (I can't remembered if she named it turkey or insinuated).
At least she was associating the holiday with the feast!
Now to Thanksgiving day: my dad came over in the morning to get his turkey going on the BBQ, while I got my turkey prepped for the oven.
He came back a little before 1:00, with my mom.
Immediately, my mom marched upstairs to my room, purse still on her shoulder, because 1:00 is her naptime.
She laid down on my bed, complaining that it was too light in my room, the kids were too noisy, my bed isn't as comfortable and she wishes my dad would have let her stay home to take her nap.
I left her alone to her nap.
By 2:30, she was downstairs to take her medicine, again complaining about how she didn't rest well due to the noise and light.
She sat in the living room for a few minutes, having a one-sided conversation with my great-grandma.
Once she was finished telling grandma about her ailments, she came to my computer, where she sat, playing games, the remainder of the afternoon while the rest of us prepared the food for our feast.
When it was time to eat, my mom took one look at the table and immediately began complaining, "Where's the salad?
Why isn't there salad?
I don't like any of this stuff, I want my salad, darn it."
We explained to her that it was Thanksgiving and that these were the foods that she has always liked; her family's recipes.
She insisted that she did not like those foods and that it would make her tummy sick to eat it.
We tried to coax her to eat just a little turkey or just a little of this or that.
She ended up with a tiny dessert plate with a scoop of mashed potatoes (which she only ate half of), a buttered roll (she only ate half) and a few vegetables from a veggie platter that she drowned in ranch dressing.
Try as we might, we could not get her to eat any more than that.
She went back to her computer games until she grew tired and wanted to go home.
I think we were able to get her to stay until around 7:00; when my Aunt was the first to leave, my mom literally chased her down (as my Aunt was taking her dishes to the car) to ask her to give her a ride home.
By that time, my dad gave in to her wishes and took her home while he drove my great-grandma back to her home as well.
I had been looking forward very much to Thanksgiving this year.
I love having my brother here and love getting together with the family.
I had a good time visiting with everyone; yet I found myself, at the end of the day, feeling rather melancholy.
I think part of that was exhaustion; I had spent nearly 2 entire days in the kitchen preparing all of the food-the homemade rolls, the turkey, the potatoes and vegetables, the pies.
Not to mention all of the prep work and cleaning up that comes with cooking and hosting Thanksgiving.
A big part of it was the empty feeling at the loss of having my mom there to participate in the cooking and festivities.
Though I've hosted many holidays before, I've never NOT had my mom there in some way (if not physically then she was at least a phone call away).
When it was time to make the gravy, for instance, we had to call my mom's sister to ask exactly how mom used to make it.
Gravy was mom's specialty; no matter where were at for the holidays, mom was the master in the kitchen making the gravy.
Now she doesn't even know what gravy is.
Why didn't I think to learn from her when I had the chance?
Our family holiday dynamics are changing.
They are changing rapidly.
Judging by the progression from last year to this year, I daresay this could be the last holiday season that she is even remotely aware of what the holidays are.
I am trying my best to make the best of it, to enjoy the little moments.
But, as it seemed for Thanksgiving, those moments may already be gone.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 16, 2012>
This memoir was written by my Uncle Mike, who is my mom's oldest brother.
It's really hard to write things about a little sister you hardly knew when she was my "little" sister.
I left home to go to war only six years after my little sister was born and did not come back for almost seven years except for military leaves.
During that time I met my wife, got married, and had already started a family by the time she had grown to be a teenager.
I missed a lot by being the oldest of five children.
Even so, I was stationed somewhat close to home at my last military posting before I was discharged.
Just a few weeks before I was to finish my Air Force duty, I came home and picked up my little brother, Jeff, and Deana to take them back with me to Arizona where I was at Luke Air Force Base, near Phoenix.
I'm sad to say that at first, things seemed a little awkward.
It was like babysitting kids I only barely knew.
Deana was still very young.
Deana was only about 12 or 13 years old.
She seemed very subdued, even though I knew she idolized her big brother in uniform who had sent her interesting and beautiful gifts from my travels in the Far East.
I'm sure that wasn't because she was timid being around me.
If I had to think about it, I would have to say she missed living with her mother and father as a married couple.
Sadly, mom and dad divorced while I was away, and Deana lived with my dad who seemed not to care much about the children he had to care for in absence of a mother.
This would make any child sad.
Hell, it made ME sad, and I was living with the love of my life and enjoying every minute of it!!
After a few days they started to have more fun as we swam almost every day in the pool at our apartment complex in the sizzling Arizona heat.
We're talking August, folks...Hot, hot August!
Then we took a trip to the Grand Canyon and Deana still talks about it to this day.
It seems odd to me that someone can have clear memories of times long gone by, but cannot remember her friends names from church, or who is the President of the United States.
Anyway, in absence of having decent guidance at home, I stayed close to my little brother and sister as much as I could while being a deputy sheriff in the neighboring county.
I would drop in on their apartment my dad rented in La Sierra, and visit her at work when she worked at TG&Y; stores.
Once when we found out she was dating a non-LDS guy, my wife warned her that his "kind" have only one thing they are after--sex.
Well, it didn't take long for my wife to be proven a seer.
Not that he tried anything with her, but he did it with someone else and she found out.
She broke up with him and came to ask how my wife knew that would happen?
She has been grateful ever since.
Then she told me sometime later she was dating a neighbor boy named Buddy Alves.
I remember when I first saw him and wondered if my sister had even learned anything from the last guy.
Next thing I know he is being baptized and my sister is marrying him.
She had to get out from under a stressful and lonely home life living with my dad and his second wife.
How could I blame her?
But, something was obvious; the two were madly in love, and even a hard-nosed cop like me could tell that.
So, believe it or not, I began to drop by the newly-weds home as much as I could.
That's when I really got to know my sister, and as you might expect, her new husband who I grew to like quickly, long hair, beads, and all!!
He was not afraid of hard work and I respected that a lot.
I knew he would be good for her.
We camped and fished together often and always got together on holidays.
My sister also added to the family income by selling crystal and had these "crystal" parties.
I remember one time when she was trying to sell a group of ladies a crystal dove, or something like that.
She said you could use the dove as a way to signal your husband that "tonight's a good night for romance" by placing the dove upside down on the dresser.
I about swallowed my tongue.
That's just stuff I never talk about openly, but both my brother and Deana would giggle at small gatherings joking about uhh, umm let's just say their love times.
Funny, now she has totally lost any brakes and will sometimes say things that will make you blush or cover your ears and yell "la,la,la,la!" I think it wasn't until her older years that we finally grew close and truly felt like a brother and sister should towards each other.
Which makes it all the more difficult to accept that I am already losing the sister I once knew.
I am so thankful that in the life that awaits us hereafter, we will be as close as any family can be thanks to the blessings of a merciful God, temple sealings, and the power of the Priesthood.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 15, 2012>
About 6 years ago, my twin brother moved from California to Florida.
I hate to sound over dramatic about it, but it was near devastating to me.
My brother and I are close.
I knew that no distance could break the bond we share, but I was sensible enough to realize that our family dynamic would be changing.
Joe would be missing out on our family dinners, holidays and parties.
My sister and I have remained close in proximity to my parents, and even though we have our differences, it is nice that we are closeby and that we can call on each other when we need something, and that our kids can grow up together.
Being states apart from my brother, our children would not grow up close to one another.
Simply put, things would not be the same with him living so far away.
Joe loves Florida.
He loves the heat and he loves the adventure.
In the time he's spent away, he met and married his wife, Natalie, and they welcomed their first baby girl, Adri, into their family (2 1/2 years ago).
And baby #2 is on his way!!
They have done a good job keeping in touch; thank goodness for modern day technology to help with that!
They usually make 1-2 visits per year, and we've gone out there twice on family vacations to visit.
Truly, we've done the best we can to remain close and make sure that our children are familiar with their cousins, Aunts and Uncles.
In fact, despite the distance, Natalie has become one of my closest friends.
We talk to each other often on the phone.
But it still isn't the same as having them here.
I've tried several times to convince Joe and Natalie to move to California.
My efforts were always in vain; Joe's life had been established in Florida and he was happy living there.
Since my mom's diagnosis, I have really felt more empty without my twin brother here to share in those precious moments that we have left as a whole family.
In May, three months after mom's diagnosis, Joe and Natalie (and Adri, of course) made a trip out here to visit.
I think part of that visit was an urgency Joe felt to come and visit mom.
At that time, we still had so many questions unanswered about her timeline and whatnot, as we had not yet had our follow-up with UCLA.
We had a great time together, but it was very short-lived.
He was only able to make a short weekend trip and before we knew it, he was on his way back to Florida with no definite plans set on a return visit.
Before he left, we, as a family, had a deep conversation about life and about mom.
We talked until 2:00 in the morning.
There were some tears shed (by the women, anyway); of course I made my usual proposition for Joe to move back home (but this time with good reason!)
He told me, "It's not that easy to just pick up and leave.
I have a job, a house...our whole life is in Florida."
I realized that he was right.
It was a tough pill to swallow.
But he's right; it's not that easy to just pick up and leave your whole way of life behind.
The next month, our family (husband and kids) flew out to Florida where we spent 2 entire weeks with Joe's family.
We hung around his parts of Florida and met up with some friends, altogether, in the Bahamas.
It was such a sweet thing to see Adri playing with her cousins.
Every morning she would come waltzing down the hallway and poking her head into my bedroom, saying, "Aunt Cis [Sis], wake up!"
It was a sweet and happy time for all of us to be together and to bond.
When we left, we missed Joe's family terribly.
They missed us just as much.
And then something happened.
Something I never imagined ever would.
Joe began looking for jobs back in the West.
I didn't want to get my hopes up.
It sounded way too good to be true.
But I started imagining what it would be like to have him close again-to have him for dinners, parties, date nights.
To have cousin sleep-overs and playing with one another.
By September, it was official.
He took a transfer at his job to Arizona, just a 5 hour drive from our home, while he continues the hiring process for another job, which could land him back in California (processing time for that job could take up to a year).
I was wondering what had caused this sudden change of heart, although deep down I knew.
When someone close to you is diagnosed with a terminal illness, priorities begin to change.
As part of his announcement, he wrote a blog, which really touched me (sorry if that embarasses you, Joe).
He gave me permission to share some of what he wrote.
"In March my mom was diagnosed with a rare form of dementia.
After her diagnosis, my sister was trying to convince me that this is reason enough for me to pack it up and come on back to SoCal.
I of course wasn't having it.
I had plans to stay here and didn't want to start over just to get there once my mom doesn't remember me.
I'm not too optimistic that she will remember me in a year or two.
There are a lot of things that I miss about SoCal but a lot of things I can't stand... "Well in late June my sister's family came out to visit for a couple weeks.
I got to see Adriana running around with her cousins having a good time and I actually got a break from her and got to be an adult for a while.
Normally I'm either babysitting or entertaining the kid all day.
We never get a break.
With cousins around we got to let her go play and we could sit back and relax and have some time to ourselves for once.
It was a nice break from our busy lives.
Since then I just haven't really been the same.
I've felt like even though there's so many good things going on in my life it's kinda empty sometimes.
I've felt like I don't want to be here anymore.
We have this nice house and a pool and it never gets used.
It just seems kind of pointless..." There comes a point in life where you realize what is most important.
That's not to say that Joe's life in Florida wasn't important.
He and Natalie had decent jobs, a beautiful home...but I think that he had re-priorized what is most important.
It's not about the house or the things, it's about family.
Our time with mom is limited.
Really, our time with anyone is limited; we never know when our turn here on Earth is up.
I know it was a sacrifice to make the move, especially for Natalie, who left behind some of her family in Florida.
But I am glad that they chose to come home and make the most of the time we have left with mom, as well as make many happy memories between cousins and family.
Last week, my dad flew out to Florida, helped Joe load up the moving van and move cross-country.
It took them 4 solid days to make the trek.
Joe is now settling into his new place in Arizona and will be here for all of the holidays.
I am so overflowed with joy that they have moved closer.
I feel like our family is whole again...for the time being, anyway.
I'm looking forward to a very memorable holiday season filled with family.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 13, 2012>
My husband and I just love to get away on date nights.
I'm a stay-at-home...and I love my kids and my job.
I also look forward to getting out at least a couple times a month with my hubby!
When we go out, we have to make sure we have a babysitter for the kids.
Aubrey is 7 (she is the oldest of the younger kids).
Aubrey's a pretty smart girl.
She knows how to take care of her basic needs: grooming, going to the bathroom, fixing simple meals, etc.
She knows her address and how to call 911.
But there are other concerns I would have in leaving her home alone.
If there were a fire, or other medical emergency (if she cut herself with a knife while making a meal, for example), would she know what to do in her frantic state of mind?
What if a stranger came to the door and tried to intrude?
What about if she decided she wanted to go out for a walk by herself...would she be able to make it home safely?
These are the very dilemmas we are facing at this point with my mom.
While, for the most part, she is able to meet her basic needs, there have been some safety issues that are of concern to us in leaving her home alone.
In talking with other members of my online support group, my dad and I have concluded that we do not want to wait until the moment that disaster strikes to realize that she needs full-time supervision and care.
We are in the process of obtaining Social Security benefits for her; in the meantime, it would be quite costly to bring in a full-or even part-time caregiver and aren't in the position to do that at this point.
Until we are able to receive some sort of benefits or caregiving grants, we have family coming in a few times a week to help supervise mom while my dad is gone at work.
Hopefully this arrangement will continue to work until we are able to obtain some funding to assist us in her care.
Mondays are my day to go in and "babysit" my mom.
I've been doing this for a few months now, and mom is still resistant to my being there.
There is usually the preemptive measures attempted by mom the night before (when I remind her I'll be over in the morning) to prevent me from coming, "You don't need to come over, no.
I'm okay, I'm fine.
I don't know why you think you need to come over every time on Monday."
Followed by my attempted pacification, "I know you're okay, mom.
I just want to come visit you and help you out.
I know you don't always feel good, so I thought I could help and keep you company.
It must be lonely being by yourself everyday."
Despite her resistance, I always show up on her doorstep every Monday morning.
I usually let myself in with my housekey.
Last Monday, after my boys continually rang the bell while I fidgeted with my keys, mom cracked open the door, peeked her head out, and said, with obvious disappointment and annoyance in her voice, "Oh.
It's you.
I was hoping you weren't coming today."
I chuckled (I know better than to let it hurt my feelings) and let myself in.
As usual, the house was dark and stuffy.
Mom gets very hot and sweaty while blow drying her hair.
She believes that only if she keeps all the doors and windows shut, and every light off, that her house will remain cool.
Often times I find her sitting in her room in the dark, on the edge of her bed, arms folded across her chest and her posture slumped over as she stares down at the ground.
I admit I feel somewhat of a shut-in when I am at her house.
When I arrive, the first thing I do is open up the curtains in the living room-after leaving the front door open to air the place out.
She usually goes back to her bedroom to finish getting ready-getting ready for what I don't exactly know.
Ready for a day of sitting at home.
She doesn't want to look like a "Plain Jane", even for herself.
When she makes her way back into the living room, she immediately shuts the door and complains, "I don't like it when you leave the door open.
There's yucky stuff in the air that comes inside."
Sometimes she will swat at the "yucky stuff" in the air (which I only see to be normal lint that can only be seen in the light), followed with, "See?
Ewe, no, yuck!"
Sometimes she will leave the blinds open; other times she will close them and complain that it makes the house too hot.
The sun hits the opposite side of the house, and I don't notice the house getting any hotter with the blinds open.
I usually open everything back up when she leaves back to the office to play games on the computer, only to repeat the process once again when she comes back out.
One of my Monday duties is to clean out the fridge.
This has become a sore spot with my mom.
She gets angry with me for throwing out rotted food.
"I don't like it when you come over and throw my good things away, it makes me mad when you do that!"
On a couple of occassions, she has dug the rotted food out of the trashcan, insistent that she is making it for dinner.
I had to call my dad to forewarn him about the situation and let him deal with it when he got home.
I feel bad to push it off on my dad; it's difficult for me to be in a confrontational situation with my mom.
On one hand, I can empathize with how she must be feeling.
It's hard to accept this role reversal, with me acting as her mother.
And in her mind she is perfectly fine; she doesn't need me to come in, invade her space and throw away her things, even if it is rotted food.
On the other hand, I simply cannot allow her to eat rotted food and risk her and my dad getting sick.
I've learned to try and clean out the fridge while she is away playing her games or fixing her hair.
But when she catches me, it isn't pretty.
Many times, we will run errands to the bank or grocery store on my Monday.
Lately, I've been trying to get her to do more than play computer games all day.
A couple weeks ago, I brought over one of her favorite games from the past.
When I told her the game by name, she had no idea what I was talking about.
When I coaxed her to come and sit down and see what I was talking about, she remembered how to play the game.
In fact, with only one minor reminder of one of the game's rules, she was a great player.
I only beat her by one turn.
By naptime, she is practically pushing me out the door.
She wants to be alone in an abolutely quiet house.
My youngest son is usually in the other room napping, and my 4 year old quietly watches a movie.
I firmly, but gently, tell her that I will be sticking around for a while longer and use that time to clean up around the house and organize some of the chaos.
We could literally not say a word the entire time she's napping, but she would still complain that it's not quiet enough.
Eventually, she's going to have to adjust to having someone around 24/7.
May as well help her adjust to that now.
By the time I get home, I feel a little overwhelmed as I look around my own home and see the mess that I didn't have time to clean before I left the house: the breakfast mess that is both on the floor as well as the table and in the sink, the toys that have been scattered about, shoes that were pulled out of the closet in a rushed effort to find each child their shoes, laundry piled up waiting to be thrown into the washer.
I feel physically and emotionally drained.
Not necessarily because my mom has worn me out.
It's hard to put to words; the situation is just draining.
It is very despairing to watch someone you love slowly slip away.
Yet, as maniac as my Mondays are, I am grateful to be able to help and give back for all the many things my parents have done for me over the years.
I would hope that if I found myself in this same situation someday, that my children would be there for me.
I know that my mom is oblivious to what we are doing for her now, but I believe that someday, in the hereafter, she will know everything we've done for her.
Someday, she will be whole again; she will be able to look back and see, through my actions, just how much I love her.
That is my hope.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 9, 2012>
Today is the day that I begin sharing stories and memoirs about my mom, written from other people besides myself.
I want my mom to be remembered for the beautiful person she was before the dementia.
This first post was written by my sister; my mom's 3rd child.
Grab the tissues...I sure did!
--------------------------------------------------------------- Remembering Deana: Part I, By Christina Alves-Avila When I was a child, I remember telling my parents and grandparents that they were going to live forever so that I would never have to suffer the loss of anyone I love during my lifetime.
Even as an adult, I would still carry on saying the same thing, even though I knew deep inside that, at some point in my life, I was eventually going to experience loss.
Over the years, a few family members and acquaintances passed away, but nobody with whom I was very close.
When my grandparents both passed away in 2010, when I was 25 years old, I experienced the first real loss in my life.
It was shortly before that time that my mother started acting different, though we would not have a diagnosis for two more years.
Dementia has truly changed the person my mother was.
My mother was fun, intelligent, giving, and devoted to her family and church.
My mother held many positions (unpaid) in our church over the years and hardly ever missed church.
She set a positive example for my siblings and me to follow.
When I was a child, I remember my mom attending the community college a couple of nights a week for a couple of years, maybe more, to get her Associate's Degree.
My sister, brother, and I would stay home with my dad on these nights.
I remember my mom doing her homework during the week.
I still remember her walking in her graduation, though I was still fairly young.
My mom demonstrated to me at a young age that education is important, and this is a belief I have carried with me throughout my life.
Something important to me that I will always remember is my parents' love for one another.
My sister, brother, and I used to get grossed out when my parents would "make-out" in front of us.
My mom used to say, "At least you know your parents love each other!"  And we did.
I rarely saw my parents argue.
They usually took it behind closed doors.
A few times I caught on that they were at odds about something, and I would usually find a flower or something on my mom's pillow the next day.
Something I will always remember about my mom is the way she would wake us up in the morning.
She would come into our rooms singing in her opera voice, "Good morning!
Time to get up!" Alternatively, she would often sing the song "Oh What a Beautiful Morning" (from the movie Oklahoma!).
Occasionally, when we did not respond to her singing, she would come into our doorways with a water bottle and squirt us until we jumped out of bed, wet and angry.
What a way to start the day!
I have fond memories of, as a child, sitting on my mom's lap during church and falling asleep, and, as a teenager, lying on her lap while she played with my hair.
There were the family vacations every summer that my parents would save up for all year long where we would build memories.
These are the little things I took for granted as a child.
As a boy-crazy teenage girl, I put my mom through a lot of worry and many sleepless nights.
There was no question in my mind that my mom cared about me because she was active in my life.
When I did something wrong, I was given a consequence.
I would get mad at her for "ruining my life", but deep down inside, I knew I was lucky because many of my friends did not have parents who showed that kind of love and concern.
In some ways, I was a bit of rebel, but I never snuck out my window, tried drugs or alcohol, or did a lot of other things that my friends did because I knew that my mom would find out.
My mom was at every event I participated in as a child.
She was at the Spelling Bee that I won in 5th grade.
She was also at the one in 7th grade, when I misspelled "eureka" and cried on her shoulder.
From fifth grade through high school, she came to every choir concert.
My ambition as a child and young woman was to become a singer/songwriter.
When I turned eighteen, she took me to a convention in Los Angeles for aspiring artists and paid for the hotel room.
It was at this age, in my young adulthood, that I began to identify with my mom as not just a mother, but as a friend.
When I got pregnant with my first child at the age of eighteen, unmarried and still living at home, I told my mom first.
I knew my mom would be calmer than my dad and felt less-threatened by the thought of telling her first and letting her tell my dad.
My mom suspected the pregnancy before I even told her about it - she must have had that maternal intuition.
I told her, and she cried.
She and my dad tried to talk me into adoption, without success.
My mom went to childbirth preparation classes with me.
She went to doctor's appointments and ultrasounds with me, and, when my son was born, she took me to the hospital and stayed by my side.
My mother was also in the hospital with me for the births of my other two children.
My mom helped me tremendously over the next several years.
She babysat the kids often.
Being a preschool teacher, she took an interest in helping the kids learn.
She decorated my wedding cake and birthday cakes for my kids.
She always gave me motherly advice - how to discipline, what to do when they get sick.
But her ability and willingness to help with the kids slowly diminished over the years.
She became fatigued, irritable, and impatient.
She has become more and more disinterested in the events of my life, perhaps partially due to her inability to understand everything going on around her.
She no longer has advice to give.
Though she is still physically here, I have suffered a loss - the loss of my mother and one of my closest friends.
My mom is young, and I am too young to lose her.
Then I look at my friends who have their moms much sooner and realize that there is always someone who has it worse.
I am grateful for the memories I have with my mom.
Because my mom was involved, because we made so many memories when I was young, I have so much to hold on to and remember her by.
------------------------------------------------------------------ If you'd like to contribute a story, please read this post and contact me.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 6, 2012>
I grew up in a family who expressed their patriotism to our country.
Both of my grandfathers served in the military, as well as several Aunts and Uncles.
Part of being patriotic is exercising your right to vote.
My parents set that example for us from the time we were small kids and expressed the importance of voting.
I remember both mom and dad going to the polls on election day, and returning proudly wearing their "I Voted" stickers.
Today was the first time that I can ever remember that my mom has not participated in election day.
She is not even aware that today IS election day.
If you ask her who the President of the United States is, she will not have an answer for you.
If you ask her who is running for President, she will not know.
When shown pictures (at UCLA) of our President and pictures of some of the most famous past Presidents, mom did not recognize who they were.
This comes as somewhat of a surprise to some, seeing how one of the candidates for President is a Mormon.
One of my mom's obsessive behaviors of dementia is an obsession with her religion.
One would think that she would be aware that someone of her faith is running for President.
But mom is completely oblivious to it all.
Mom has missed all of the media propaganda surrounding the election.
She does not watch TV.
She cannot comprehend what is on the screen, so she doesn't watch.
The only time she gets on the internet is to check her email; even then, she has a difficult time sorting out junk from personal emails.
In fact, I'm not even certain how often she checks her email these days.
Needless to say, she hasn't been reading up on politics via internet.
Nor does she read the newspaper or magazines anymore.
She doesn't answer most phone calls, and when she does, she is very confused and cannot comprehend most of what people are saying to her over the phone.
She does not engage in most conversations that we have when together as a family/group or one-on-one.
She can only talk about what is on her mind.
She cannot comprehend most of what we say.
It is not surprising, then, that she is oblivous to what is going on in the world around her.
The only world she lives in is her own, which is being ruled by dementia.
She is rapidly losing her knowledge and awareness of everything around her.
Dementia is a beast.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 2, 2012>
I love my mom.
I loved her before the dementia, and I love her with the dementia.
I am a little ashamed to admit this, but over the past few years, I have been struggling to bond with my mom.
In many ways, I feel detached.
This is a consequence of the disease; people with FTD lose many emotions and apathy.
Relationships often become strained with this disease.
I suppose it's not anyone's fault, it just is.
Lately, I find myself thinking about my mom; thinking about the "old" mom.
The mom whose bed I used to lay on at night and talk with until my dad kicked me out of the room.
;) The mom who was always there to help me solve a problem or give me advice.
The mom who shared in my joys, and my sorrows.
The mom who loved to sing and dance while doing chores around the house.
The mom who loved to bake, especially around the holidays.
The mom who taught me how to be a mom.
I miss my mom.
But I am fortunate to have many memories, which I will forever hold dear.
Sometimes, I look at my mom and I think "Who is this person?"
The dementia has taken over, and the person she once was is becoming more and more of a distant memory.
Today, I came across a blog written by a daughter about her mother, who is also suffering from a form of FTD (known as PPA-primary progressive aphasia).
In her blog, she shared stories written by others about her mom.
They were a loving and sweet depiction of who her mother is, who she was before this horrible disease started to take over.
I felt inspired as I read this woman's blog.
I write about my mom as she is now, with the disease that has invaded her being.
I do this to educate about dementia.
I do this to share with family members and friends what is going on with my mom, so that they might gain a better understanding and know what to expect when interacting with my mom.
But I don't want my mom to be remembered for the alien being that she has become.
I want my mom to be remembered for who she was.
I am beginning a new project on my blog.
Every week, I would like to feature a post written by others who knew and loved my mom before the dementia.
I would like to pay tribute for the wonderful wife, mother, Aunt, sister and friend that she was.
Please contact me if you would like to participate in this project.
You can email me a story, memory, thought, or anything remembered about my mom.
If you have pictures, they would be a lovely touch; if not, your words will be enough.
I will feature a post every Friday-I'm hoping for a large response to this, so please be patient while you wait for yours to be featured :) For all those who knew my mom, please help me to honor my mom, for the wonderful person that she is.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 1, 2012>
Happy Halloween!!
I am posting this picture just for fun, and because my kids were ridiculously cute in their costumes this year.
I managed to find time (barely) to make my and my daughter's Indian costumes.
The boys had to settle for Amazon this year ;) The teenagers, of course, wanted to do their own thing.
They are the "crazies" of our bunch!
Before dementia, my mom loved having all of the grandkids together to trick-or-treat on Halloween.
There was almost no option to do it any other way; it was a big deal to see the kids in their costumes.
Before we moved up the street from my parents, and lived about 20 minutes away, we would come to spend Halloween night trick-or-treating in my parent's neighborhood (along with my sister) so all of the cousins could be together and so that grandma could get pictures of her grandbabies.
Mom also loved us to come along to their church ward's Halloween trunk-or-treat, usually held the night before Halloween.
So we have always had at least 2 nights of festive fun and celebration altogether as a family.
We started a new tradition last year at our house on Halloween night.
We decorate our garage and invite our friends and both sides of the family to come over, have some "spooky" food and take the kids trick-or-treating around the block.
We have a great time.
It can be chaotic with all the kids...just look at this group!
But they are memories worth making and we have a great time together.
Like I said, we started this tradition last year.
Last year was pre-diagnosis, but we knew mom wasn't quite right.
We were frustrated and a little hurt when she refused to come over and celebrate Halloween with us.
She was obsessed with staying home at her house and passing out candy to their trick-or-treaters.
I think what she was mostly obsessed with was seeing her past Head Start student, who lives up the street and who she knew would trick-or-treat at her house.
It did sting a little that she seemed to care more about seeing her past student than her grandkids.
However, she did attend her ward's trunk-or-treat the night before and we went along with her to that.
I suppose she figured she already saw the grandkids together and spent an evening with them.
This year, she did not participate in any Halloween festivities at all.
I prepped her last month about Halloween...she didn't know what I was talking about.
As Halloween got closer and we talked more and more about it, I think she figured out what the holiday was.
But she would not come to the trunk-or-treat at the church and she would not come to my house.
She did not pass out candy at her house either.
As far as I know, she sat at home with her music on, playing her computer games until it was time to go to bed.
She didn't see the grandkids in their costumes nor show any interest in them or the holiday at all; she was completely detached.
Halloween was just another day in the world of Deana.
It is sad to see the decline and to see her uninvolved in the family traditions and activities that we once held dear.
My guess is that by next year she won't even know what Halloween is.
With Thanksgiving and Christmas approaching, I realize that the days she remembers these holidays is numbered.  
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 25, 2012>
"How is your mom?
Is she getting any worse?"
These are two very common questions that I am asked when people inquire about my mom.
I appreciate the care and concern from those around me, but I have to admit those are rather difficult questions to answer.
"How is your mom?"
Well...where do I start?
The standard answer "fine" or "okay" is a far cry from how mom is.
Do I take a pessimistic approach and answer "bad, she's doing bad."?
Do I answer that she is constantly complaining of every ache and pain?
Do I say that she is sleeping more and more, has difficulty getting up and going in the morning and is becoming more and more clumsy?
There is no short answer to that question.
"Is she getting any worse?"
This is a progressive disease.
It will only continue to get worse; it will not get better.
It's hard, sometimes, to measure day-to-day how much "worse" she has become.
The only way I can measure it is by looking back to how she was six months, or even a year ago.
AT THIS TIME LAST YEAR, mom was adopting somewhat of a rigid routine.
However, it didn't control her life.
When coming to our house for Sunday dinners, she would get a little antsy the closer it got to 8:00.
She had adopted her 9:00 bedtime, but occassionally got to bed later.
She took occassional naps but certainly did not revolve her day around her naps.
In fact, this is a picture taken exactly one year ago from this month, when my brother was visiting for our birthday.
We spent the day in San Diego as a family and visited the tide pools.
She did complain about being hungry at lunch time and was tired by the end of the day.
But she did not skip any family time for sleep.
She was happy to spend time as a family.
If I remember correctly, she even drove down there (with some family members in her car).
It was this trip when we began to question her safety as a driver, but it wasn't until months later that she was "cancelled" (as she puts it) as a driver.
At this time last year, she was still decorating cakes.
Cake decorating was one of her hobbies and talents.
Last year, she was still helping me and my sister to decorate our kid's cakes.
This is the last cake she decorated; it was for my nephew, Jeremy's birthday in September of 2011.
At this time last year, we were surprised to be learning that she was losing meanings of words and objects.
At the pumpkin patch petting zoo, she did not recognize a goat (she insisted it was a dog) and that was surprising and concerning to us.
She was starting to lose comprehension of what things were; for example, a calculator.
At this time last year, she was trying to get disability and took a leave from work.
In fact, just last summer we were debating if she should leave work completely or return for the new school year (although we leaned towards her leaving permanently).
At this time last year, she was very picky with her food.
Her list of what she could make for dinners (and remember what that food was) was becoming much shorter, but she still had about 15 things or so on her list of what she could make.
She fussed over what we made, but would usually still eat whatever we made at family dinners.
At this time last year, she had difficulty remembering people she did not see regularly.
Usually, after long explanations of who the person was, her memory would be sparked and she could put the pieces together (that was not always the case, though).
AT THIS TIME 6 MONTHS AGO, her schedule was becoming more rigid, but she still engaged in family activities over naps.
We went to San Jose for Easter (you can read about that trip here).
Although she was obsessive about her medication times and bed/wake-up times, she still got up early to go to brunch with us, and got up and spent the entire day at the zoo with us, with NO naps the entire weekend.
At this time 6 months ago, we were still somewhat surprised as we noticed some of the word comprehension she was losing.
For example, when we booked her flight and she couldn't comprehend what a layover was or what luggage is, I was suprised and saddened, as I knew the disease was progressing.
A year ago from now, she would have known what those things are.
At this time 6 months ago, the grandkid's birthday began (all the birthdays are from April on through November).
She did not help, or show any interest in helping, with any birthday cakes.
At this time 6 months ago, she was "cancelled" as a driver.
We questioned if it was truly necessary, knowing deep down that it was time, but still thinking that, if given the chance, she might be okay to drive short distances.
At this time 6 months ago, her menu of what recipes she would remember and make reduced to approximately 10 things.
She was becoming even pickier with foods we made, but we could still usually coax her to try things and eat it.
If she did not recognize a food, she might eventually remember once she tried it.
At this time 6 months ago, she spent a lot of time doing fill-in puzzles and playing computer games.
AT THIS TIME, she has become completely inflexible.
Even with my twin brother arriving in town for only 48 hours, she would not compromise her naps to spend family time with us.
She will not miss a nap.
At this time, we would never even consider the possibility that she would be coherent enough to drive, even short distances.
At this time, she has about 5 things that she is still able to remember and make for dinner (and most of it involves the microwave or stovetop...no oven).
At this time, we don't even expect her to comprehend what most things are that we talk to her about (calculator, luggage, etc).
We are certainly not shocked or surprised when she does not understand something.
She does not comprehend most of what we say.
She cannot hold down a 2-way conversation.
At this time, if she does not see you on a regular basis, she will not recognize who you are, even if you are family (although once she is told who you are, she will remember IF you are somebody that she is familiar with).
You can read about that in my birthday post.
At this time, she spends a large amount of her time playing computer games.
She is no longer able to do the fill-in puzzles; she says her brain is "too stupid".
At this time, we are looking to have people come over throughout the day while my dad is at work, as we question some safety issues of her being alone.
And that is the long answer to "how is your mom doing?"
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 23, 2012>
I have a very distinct memory of a trip to the mountains that we took when I was a small child.
I remember my cousin, William, went with us.
I don't remember too many details about the day-I believe we were up there playing in the snow.
But the ride home was an experience that has been seared into my memory.
I suppose, at the time, it was a bit traumatic for my 7 year-old self, which is why I remember it so well.
As we made our way down the windy mountain road, William, who was sitting beside me, started feeling a little queasy.
Without any warning, he began barfing, thankfully catching it in his hands.
As soon as my mom realized what was happening, she pulled our Ford Aerostar van over to a turn-out on the side of the road.
Somebody (I can't remember if it was my mom or someone else) quickly made their way to the sliding door with an empty paper bag, putting it under his hands as the contents dripped inside.
I still remember the pungent smell of what he ate as I sat beside him and observed the scene.
It was all I could do to not lose my own lunch.
As soon as we were able, everyone was hopping out of the van to escape the stench of vomit.
This incident popped into my head again the other day as we drove to my sister's college graduation, which is about an hour drive from where we are at.
My dad drove their SUV, with mom in the passenger seat, my sister, Christina, behind her, my Aunt Claudia behind my dad, and me in the middle.
Over the past couple of years, mom has become very sensitive in the car.
Aunt Claudia told us a similar story to what I've just shared, where my mom had thrown up on her (Claudia) in the car when they were kids.
Apparently car sickness was a problem for her as a child, and it's a problem for her again, now, as she's reverting back to her childlike ways.
We've had incidences of mom throwing up in the car before, usually when it is a longer trip.
My dad found a connection with her vomit and Slim Fast; it seems that when she drinks her morning Slim Fast and takes her medication along with it, it makes her more sensitive in the car.
She throws up every time.
My dad has forbidden her from drinking Slim Fast before a long trip.
I know that might sound harsh, but remember that she is a child now.
Skipping the Slim Fast works.
She doesn't throw up if she doesn't drink the Slim Fast.
That particular morning, however, she was able to sneak in her Slim Fast.
Sure enough, she got sick in the car.
All the way to the graduation, she made burping and gagging noises and spit in a small plastic bag.
I think I speak for everyone in the car when I say that she was psyching herself out; the more she thought about it, the more she exaggerated her sound effects and in essence she was making herself throw up.
Out came the chocolate drink into the small bag.
We passed another bag up to her, as the one she had was simply too small and was beginning to leak from the bottom.
We told her to put the small bag inside the big bag.
"What??
I have a bag."
"Deana, it's leaking, put it inside the other bag," my dad tried to explain.
"Huh-uh.
I have a bag.
I'm okay," mom argued back.
We went back and forth with mom, her not comprehending that the bag had a leak.
We eventually forced the bag under her small bag.
All of the sudden, she took a tissue and began rubbing her leg and the seat underneath.
"How did this happen?"
She said as she scrubbed the drippings from her seat.
By this point, humor was the only thing keeping us sane.
Every time she gagged, it made us gag.
She would hold up her bag to examine it's contents and occassionally sniff it; dad would tell her to put it down, and we, in the back seat, were rolling down our windows to catch a fresh breath of air and get our gag reflexes under control.
Unfortunately for me, I was stuck in the middle seat and didn't get to partake in all that fresh air.
At some points, mom's gaggging noises were so loud and obnoxious that I had to plug my ears and start (loudly) humming a song to drown out the sound effects.
My sister was laughing at me.
My Aunt was dry heaving.
My dad went from reeling at the vomit, to joking, to laughing at all of us in the back seat with our weak stomachs.
The scene was actually quite comical.
We made it to the graduation without barfing all over each other and sat there for over three hours, without food.
By the time we were done, mom was very antsy, tired, hungry and had a headache.
An empty, grumbling stomach does not help with car sickness.
I tried suggesting a burger stop, but nobody listened to me.
Bummer.
The ride home was FAR worse than the drive there.
She was burping, which turned into gagging, which turned into spitting and heaving, with small amounts of barf mixed in there, the ENTIRE drive home.
To make matters worse, mom had left her barf bag in the car during the entire ceremony, despite my dad's reminders to take it out and find a trash can.
You can imagine the smell.
As she began her heaving on the ride home, we quickly realized that were out of bags.
My dad urged me to look around for something that would work.
In the back seat behind me was a bag filled with puppy pads (for potty training puppies).
Thank goodness my sister didn't clean up her things after she had borrowed the SUV!
Ha ha.
I hurriedly dumped out the puppy pads and molded one on the inside of the plastic bag that was holding them.
We were joking and laughing as we presented mom her new barf bowl.
She didn't understand the concept at first but eventually utilized my handicraft.
As we were approaching our freeway exit (to home), somehow mom got onto the subject of wanting to go on vacation together this summer to Nauvoo, Illinois.
She wants to drive through Utah and Colorado, visiting family along the way, until we reach Nauvoo, altogether as one, big, happy family.
The drive is almost 2,000 miles with over 26 hours spent in the car.
My dad, sister and I looked at each other with amusement.
That's just not going to happen.
Thankfully, the rest of us made it through 2 1/2 hours in the car without throwing up on each other.
Poor mom. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 15, 2012>
Since my mom's diagnosis, I have been searching for ways to become involved in the dementia community and to help in some way.
I received an email a few months ago, after leaving a comment on a blog, about a walk for Alzheimer's that was to take place near our home in Southern California.
I thought about the idea and looked into the requirements to walk or start a team.
I was a little concerned that I wouldn't be able to get a full team together.
I was talking the idea over with my Aunt, who, without skipping a beat, said "I'll be there."
Aunt Peggy and Uncle David live 5 1/2 hours away, so it was a big deal to me that they were so willing to come and support me in my efforts with the walk.
I figured that if they could come all this way for the walk, surely other family members would jump on board and join the team.
By the end of the next day, I signed up and formed "Team Dee" and had my first two team members: my Aunt Peggy and her husband, Uncle David.
Soon after, my dad, sister, other family members and friends signed up and we began raising money for this great cause.
Last Saturday was the walk.
I have been looking forward to it for months now.
I was touched by the support of friends and family who made a point to join us in this walk.
The grandkids were all there to show support for their grandma as well.
To get into the spirit of the walk, we each made a goal to raise $100 and wear our t-shirts.
Most of us made it.
Some came simply for support, which was appreciated as well.
I made buttons for everyone to wear on their t-shirts.
My friend, Stephani, made purple bows for the girls to wear.
Everyone got bracelets to wear (which you can find in my dementia shop).
Because my dad, Aunt Peggy and I are a bit competitive by nature, we each raised over $500 (my dad raised close to $1,000) to become a part of the Champion's Club.
We wore our medals proudly.
We had a lot of fun walking together for this great purpose.
Our team was able to raise over $3,000 for the Alzheimer's Association in just a few short months, which put us on the top 5 fundraising families.
We are already planning it out for next year.
We were so set on earning our t-shirts, that we didn't realize (until it was too late) that teams are encouraged to make their own shirts.
This was our first walk, so it's a learning curve.
Next year we will be wearing our own shirts to wear proudly.
And hopefully we can beat Pauline's Angels and take the award for the highest fundraising family team ;)  When you do a walk for other causes-diabetes, cancer, etc-the person you are walking for is generally aware that you are supporting them in the cause.
That was the only downer of this walk; my mom had no clue what we were doing.
Even if we had tried explaining it to her, she would not have grasped the concept.
I don't need a pat on the back from my mom, I only want her to know just how much we love her and support her and are doing all we can to be involved and help in finding the cure for the dementia that has taken her away from us.
I suppose at some point in time (in the next life) she will understand what we are doing for her.
In the meantime, it feels good to be involved in something that is bigger than ourselves and to join forces with the millions of other people affected by this horrific disease. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 12, 2012>
When I was in high school, I was a part of something amazing: The Rubidoux High School Madrigals, under the direction of Ms. Staci Della-Rocco.
Ms. D (as we affectionately called her) was an extraordinary choir teacher.
She was passionate about music and was exceptional at teaching kids music.
I know choir has a bad rap in some schools; at Rubidoux kids were lining up to join choir, from football players, cheerleaders and jocks to student body...being in Ms. D's choir was anything but "nerdy".
And we were good.
Ms. D had the innate ability to take any Joe Schmo and turn them into a singer.
Ms. D was a perfectionist and her choirs were a direct reflection of her as a choir director, and so she pushed us to perfection.
Going to Ms. D's concerts were nothing short of magical; her music touched you at your very core and you could feel the power and influence through her singers.
Her concerts became so popular, in fact, that if you did not arrive early, you would not have a place to sit.
Belonging to madrigals meant you belonged to another family.
We were close.
To this day, the friends I keep in contact with from high school are my friends from either church or choir.
We were always together; we performed nearly 100 times a year at various clubs and events, particularly at Christmas time.
By the time Christmas day rolled around, our voices were hoarse from so many performances.
Her music, and performing with the madrigals, is what put me in the Christmas spirit.
Every year we went on tour somewhere exciting: Hawaii and Disneyworld were among my favorite trips.
Ms. D was a teacher of music, but she taught us so much more than that.
She taught us about friendship and love, about acceptance and tolerance, commitments and responsibilities, self confidence.
Part of who I am today can be linked to Ms. D and her influence in my life.
After graduation, we remained very close friends.
Three years ago, Ms. D passed away at the age of 51 after a long and brave battle of breast cancer.
She was the first person who passed away that I was very close to.
It was difficult for me and for all who have been touched by her.
Over 800 people came to honor her at her funeral (and hundreds more who would've loved to be there, but distance kept them from attending).
It was a devastating loss for the school, the community and for all of those who have become friends with her.
A year after her passing, the High School named and dedicated their new theatre after Ms. D. I couldn't be more proud and can't think of anyone who deserves this great honor more than Ms. D. Losing Ms. D has been very hard for me, especially at the holidays.
I miss her.
I miss her music.
In fact, Christmas just isn't the same without her concerts, downtown caroling and musical cheer.
Even 3 years later, we all still feel the void.
This week, my adopted-daughter had a choir concert.
Since we moved back to the area I grew up in, she attends the new high school in our area, which is where Ms. D finished her teaching career.
It has been difficult for a new teacher to come and take over the vocal program, as Ms. D was a legend in this community and at this school.
They have already gone through one teacher; they are now on their second.
It is impossible for any choir teacher to fill Ms. D's shoes, and the program has been struggling.
I had mixed emotions and I attended Maurina's concert.
I am so happy to see her involved in the music program, as it is obviously near and dear to my heart.
I didn't realize how hard it would be to sit through the concert, the concert where my beloved Ms. D no longer directed.
The kids did a great job and I am very proud of Maurina.
But a sense of sadness washed over me as I reminisced about the greatness of what once was.
The room was half empty.
The kids were not uniform in their appearance.
The dynamics and the passion was absent.
The magic is gone.
As I sat in the audience, thinking of Ms. D, I reflected a lot about life and the changes it brings.
I miss Ms. D. I miss that magical time in my life.
Not that I'd want to go back, but it was a time when life was simple and happy; a time when my biggest stress was a math test or whether I'd get asked to the prom.
It was a time when all the people I loved were still here: Ms. D, my grandma and grandpa, my mom.
As I thought back to that time in my life, I thought a lot about my mom and the person that she was back then.
She was happy and outgoing and loved life.
She supported us in all we did; she never missed a concert and she always gleamed with pride watching me and my siblings perform our music.
Oh how life changes.
After a brief intermission, the choir director took a moment to recognize that October is breast cancer awareness month.
He spoke of Ms. D and mentioned the theatre which has been named after her.
He asked us all to take a moment of silence for her and her memory.
That is when the tears began rolling down my cheek.
I cried for Ms. D. I cried for my grandparents.
I cried for my mom.
I cried for the difficult changes that life has brought.
What I would give to have simplicity and happiness again, to be rid of the sadness that lingers when we lose the people we love.
I say it all the time: make the most of today.
Make all the memories you can, while you can.
You never know when the people you love will be gone.
And when that time comes, all you have left are the memories of what used to be.
Make them count.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 9, 2012>
Thirty-one years (and 2 days) ago, my mom gave birth to a beautiful set of twins.
See, aren't they beautiful?
;) For every year of my life, with the exception of 2, I have celebrated my birthday with my twin brother, Joe.
The first birthday we missed together was our 18th, when I was 3 states away in college.
The following year, however, Joe drove 16 hours straight through the night to visit me at college to spend our 19th birthday together.
The other birthday missed was a couple of years ago, as he was living in Florida and had planned for the holidays (and couldn't make both birthday and holidays work).
Our birthday just isn't complete if we don't have each other to celebrate with.
It's a twin thing.
A few years ago, Joe moved across the country, to Florida.
It's been hard having him live so far away.
He's been missing out on family parties and Sunday dinners and it just isn't complete without him here.
On the bright side, he has continued to make it out every year for our birthday.
It's something I look forward to every year; to celebrate with my "womb mate".
This year, there was a slight change of plans.
A few weeks ago, Joe was interviewed and hired for a job in Arizona, which is only a 5 hour drive from where we live (he is taking this job while processing for another job which could put him back in California...the processing time on that job is a year).
At this point in our lives, I think Joe misses the family gatherings and we are learning all too well that our time with one another is precious.
With him moving close, we will be able to see each other at least monthly and be there for special occassions.
Last week, as well as this week, he is in Arizona for job training.
With the upcoming moving expenses, he informed me that he would be unable to make it out for our birthday.
Obviously I was terribly bummed that he couldn't make it.
Normally I'd hassle him a little and give him the twin guilt that we simply can't miss our birthday together, but given the circumstances, I didn't push the issue.
I know he's giving up a lot to come here and I am ecstatic that he will be living closer.
He will be here right in time for Thanksgiving.
As we talked about the weekend and my birthday, my husband insisted that he wanted to take me out to breakfast.
'Why breakfast?'
I thought.
He knows I'm not a morning person.
Nevertheless, I could see that my sweet hubby really wanted to celebrate with the family by taking me out to breakfast, so I went along with it.
Imagine my surprise, when I walked into IHOP and saw my brother sitting next to my dad in the waiting area!
I was so excited to see him and giddy that they were able to surprise me without even one suspicion on my part (anyone who knows me well knows it is extremely difficult to surprise me...I'm suspicious by nature, ha ha).
As happy as I was to see Joe, I was a little bummed that Natalie and Adri couldn't make it (his wife and adorable daughter).
Again, they have a lot of expenses to pay for with the upcoming move, and they just couldn't make it work.
After breakfast, Jeff and I had an errand to run, as did my dad and brother, so they said they would meet me at my house when they were done.
As we pulled into the driveway at my house, I saw Joe's rental car pull in behind us.
I was caught off guard when I saw Natalie sitting in the front seat.
Not only did they surprise me once, but they got me twice without me even suspecting a thing!!
(I must be losing it in my old age!!)
That was a really long background story for this post.
I suppose I wanted to illustrate how close we are as a family and how much it meant to have Joe here for our birthday.
We miss him terribly when he's away.
It was tough on my mom when he left as well.
So how did she react when she saw him?
Joe arrived at my parent's house late Friday night.
As you probably know from reading my other posts, mom's bedtime is 9:00.
Joe got in around 10:00, and at a time like this, who cares about bedtime?
Mom was told that Joe was there and she refused to get out of bed.
"I'm such a plain Jane without my make-up, I don't want him to see me!"
This has become the norm with her; she doesn't want anyone to see her without make-up because she is a "Plain Jane".
I usually pay no attention to her objections and remind her that I have seen her my entire life without make-up.
Joe did the same.
He went back to her room, despite her objections, and visited with her as she babbled on and on about her "weird" looks and her "severe" health problems.
The next morning, she did not join us for breakfast.
It was too early for her to get out of bed and get ready to go.
I, of course, expected this.
But with Joe there, I a little surprised that she did not take advantage of the short time we had with him.
After Natalie arrived, I took her out to grab a bite to eat and to stop over at my parent's house to say hi to my mom.
Mom didn't know yet that Natalie was there.
We wanted to see if she would recognize her, although deep down I already knew what the outcome would be.
I walked into the living room and called for my mom.
"I'm back here, I can't come right now," she called back.
Despite my insistance, she wouldn't come.
I knew exactly where she was: at her computer playing a game.
Natalie and I walked back to the room and stood in the doorway, side by side.
Mom turned around and looked at me and her eyes kept glancing over at Natalie as she rapidly spoke to me, "What I was wondering is if we could take you later today for dinner at Miguel's with Joe here, too, for...to celebrate your birthday too, we could eat at Miguel's because it's so delicious and Joe would really like that too...yeah..." I nodded my head and then turned my attention to Natalie.
"Mom, do you remember...my friend?"
Mom looked blankly at Natalie and then slightly shook her head.
"No..." "You don't remember who this is Mom?
Natalie?"
I expected this, but it was still hard to process.
I felt a small lump form in my throat.
I could see the sadness in Natalie's eyes as well, as she fought the tears from surfacing.
Mom tried to connect the dots.
"Deana," Natalie said, "It's me, Natalie.
Joe's wife."
"Oh, Natalie.
Yeah," she said, seemingly embarassed at having forgotten her daughter-in-law.
"Yeah I know Natalie, I just didn't know she was here so I didn't know it was her."
It makes sense.
With this form of dementia, if they don't see you on a regular basis, they cannot connect your face and name.
Once she was prompted, she recognized Natalie again (this isn't the case for everyone she sees...but she is still familiar with the idea of family at this point...if that makes sense).
I wonder if she would have recognized Joe had she not already known he was coming?
Later that afternoon, we had some family time touring March Air Force Base (an airfield museum).
Try as we might to get my mom to come with us for some family fun, she would not come.
It was her naptime.
She joined us later that evening for birthday dinner at- where else -Miguel's.
The next morning, my dad came over to my house with my mom.
Joe and Natalie had decided to spend the night at our place and we had planned to have a family BBQ later on that afternoon for our birthday.
It was around 11:30 when they arrived.
Shortly after arriving, my dad had to take her home because it was almost noon, which is lunch time.
I was upstairs, primping, in the brief time they were over so I didn't even realize they had left.
After the fact, I told my dad she could've eaten lunch at my house, but mom wanted to be at her own house with her own food.
Dad returned shortly before 1:00 without my mom.
She refused to come because it was her naptime.
My sister, who was working until 2:30 on that day, stopped by to pick mom up later on in the afternoon on her way over.
We took advantage of the family time and took some pictures; mom with her twins and a full family shot with all the kids and grandkids (the grandkids are taking over!!)
I admit that I felt frustrated with mom; I think we all felt unsettled with the way she had behaved over the weekend.
Joe had traveled miles and hours to see us; he hadn't been here in over 4 months yet she spent more time alone at home than she did with us as a family.
Logically we know that we can't blame her, for it isn't truly "mom" that is behaving this way.
It is the disease.
So we know that we can't be mad at her for choosing to pull away from our precious family time, but it still hurts all the same.
She is slipping away from us day by day, little by little.
For those of us who are around regularly, the changes seem more gradual.
For Joe and Natalie, whose visits are few and far between, the changes are much more noticable.
While I enjoyed my short time with my brother and his family enormously, I miss my mom's presence.
In the blink of an eye, our family has changed.
We cannot bring back the times we once had and enjoyed together.
One thing I have learned is to never pass up an opportunity to spend time with the people you love.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 2, 2012>
Have you ever been out in public and seen the moms with leashes on their kids?
Are you one of those moms?
I am.
The idea of leashing children seems to spark controversy among some people.
Before I was a mom, I was indifferent on the subject.
When my daughter was 2 years old, we were shopping at Target and she was adamant that she didn't want to sit in the cart.
After several minutes of thrashing around, we finally compromised that she could get out of the cart as long as she was holding on.
She was doing really well, until we started walking through the children's clothing section and she suddenly saw something that caught her attention.
All it took was one second for her to let go of the cart (mind you I was right next to her and watching the entire time) and she was off running through the maze of clothing racks.
I was pregnant at the time, and not as quick on my feet as I should've been; I circled around the rack to grab her and panicked when she wasn't there.
I began calling her name and frantically weaving in and out of the compacted racks as my heart raced in my search for her.
Finally, after about 45 seconds which seemed like much longer, a woman raised her arms and called to me that she was "over here".
Guess what my husband and I bought the next week?
Judge all you want, but I will not take the chance of losing my child and the fight to keep them in the cart can make any shopping experience unbearable.
I thought about this idea of "the leash" as I took my mom to Wal-mart yesterday.
It started out as any ordinary shopping trip with mom.
As I was pulling into the parking lot, she reminisced about a parent of one of her students when she was a "teacher thing" who used to work at this Wal-mart.
That should have been my red flag right there.
We pulled into a parking spot, and as usual, I barely had time to put the car into park and mom had her seatbelt off, got out of the car and began power walking to the store.
She was across the street and to the entrance of the store before I could even get my 2 boys out of the car.
I quickly got the boys out of the car and made a mad dash to follow her before she could begin her shopping.
Shopping went as expected.
She had a hard time finding the make-up that she wanted.
Luckily, she brought the empty bottle of lipstick and half used pallette of eyeshadow with her, so it was easy enough to find it for her.
When we got to the cleaner aisle, she became frustrated with me when I put Comet in her cart, even though my dad explained to her before we left that he wanted Comet versus the cleanser she's been buying, as it works better.
It made no difference how many times I tried re-explaining it to her, she was not processing what I told her.
I had to compromise; she could buy the other brand cleaner, but the Comet was to be bought for dad.
After some resistance, and a distraction with Lysol, she finally gave in.
Things seemed to be going relatively well, we had made it through shopping without any incidences.
And then we went down our final aisle.
As I helped her find her "delicious" turkey lunchmeat, I told her it was now time to go check out at the register.
A vendor was blocking the end of the aisle with large crates and he was unloading goods onto the shelves.
I told him that I needed to get by and he graciously moved the crates out of my way.
I glanced behind my shoulder just in time to see my mom at the opposite end of the aisle, turning the corner away from me.
I quickly apologized to the man and turned my cart around, racing after her.
I found her in the layaway section.
There was a younger, hispanic woman sitting in a chair at the counter, and an older, caucasion woman standing next to her, talking.
I came up behind mom, who was staring at the hispanic woman, just in time to hear her mumbling, "Is it you?
No I don't think so..." The two women looked at her with a very confused expression on their faces.
"Can we help you with something?"
the older woman asked.
"I was looking for the one who starts with an 'm'", mom replied back.
"Her name is the one that starts with an 'm' but I can't remember her name."
I put my arms around mom's shoulders and tried to redirect her.
"I don't think she works here anymore mom," I said, trying to turn her around.
I glanced back at the two women who had a look of confusion and the hispanic woman almost had a look of disgust or annoyance on her face.
I quietly told them, "sorry, she has dementia," to which the older woman gave a kind smile.
The hispanic woman still looked confused.
Mom turned back around, looked at the women, and said, "It's just so sad because I can't go visit her at her house anymore since they cancelled me as a driver."
The older woman gave a sympathetic look and I directed mom away and towards the cash register.
I should've given them an "oops" card.
I'm not so sure about a leash for a grown woman, but I do think it's time to make her wear the ID bracelet that we bought for her at the LA County Fair this year.
It's hard to get to this point and have to treat her as a child; I am sure there is some of reluctance with my dad to put the bracelet on her.
She will resist, she will feel as though we are "picking" on her; it's difficult to have to take away independence from someone you love.
Yet I feel like it's getting to the point where it is becoming necessary to take these precautions. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 1, 2012>
My last post was about finding humor in the face of this ugly disease (if you missed that post, you can read it here).
So here is some humor to start off your Monday morning.
Last night, we had our usual Sunday family dinner.
My mom was talking about something (I can't even remember now what it was) and my sister was trying to respond and have a conversation with my mom.
However, no sooner than my sister opened her mouth, my mom was talking about the next thing that was on her mind.
She takes no time to listen to responses or engage in actual conversation.
I think most of the time she simply cannot process what we are saying and can only focus on what she is thinking about.
My sister turned to me and rolled her eyes, stating, "I may as well not even talk, it makes no difference."
I answered her back, "We could probably speak another language and she'd know no difference."
Then, an idea popped into my head.
I thought it might be funny to test my theory.
As soon as mentioned it to my sister, she began chuckling.
It took me a minute to hide the smirk on my face, and then I turned to my mom and, with as straight a face I could muster, I began reciting the Pledge of Allegiance.
In Spanish.
Mom looked at me, at first with her usual blank look.
In a quick moment the blank look turned to confusion, then she narrowed her eyes and got a smirk on her face and finally said, "What, are you talking to me in Mexican?"
We all began laughing at that point, even Mom.
I think she was proud of herself for figuring it out, and we were impressed as well.
Immediately the conversation turned to my Aunt (who is a native of Mexico), "And Tina speaks that kind of Mexican too cuz she's from that place too and even though she's getting really older too in her sixties she still looks really pretty and nice too..." and on and on mom went, reminiscing about Tia Tina's first time in an earthquake after she had moved in with them (while my Uncle was in the military) and so on.
Some of you might think we're mean to joke around; those who have dealt with this sort of circumstance (and who know our family) know that a sense of humor is essential.
Sometimes that is all that gets us through the day!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, September 28, 2012>
Watching a loved one suffer from dementia is devastating.
It's not just about losing memory; it's about losing knowledge of everything they know-behavior, language, how to care for oneself, etc.
Some days, dealing with dementia can be downright depressing.
Sometimes I wonder how we're going to get through the sorrow as my mom's disease progresses.
My dad has always taught us to laugh.
And he's always been a big tease.
He always told us, "Don't take yourself too seriously."
In Susan's book (if you haven't heard about or read this book as a caregiver, click here, it's a must read!)
she talks a lot about using humor to cope.
I very much admire her positivity and her strategies in finding joy in the moment and looking for the humor in the situation.
It's what gets you through with your sanity intact.
We have had to adopt that mentality somewhat with mom's illness.
If we dwell on every crazy or embarassing behavior or every off-the-wall thing she says, it could put us into a full blown depression, because it's just so out of character for her and is very telling about the severity of her disease.
We have had to learn to laugh at a lot of things.
Like when she occasionally "exercises".
If she does the treadmill or takes long walks, she gets too sweaty.
I know, that's the point of exercise.
Try telling my mom that.
She can't handle the sweat and it's "not good" for her.
So, to keep active, she sits on the couch as she raises her ankles up and down, side to side, in a dancing motion.
She usually does this while listening to Oldies on the satellite.
Sometimes she will get up and stand on the circle rug in the middle of the living room and sway her hips side to side while walking around the outline of the rug, 'dancing'.
The first time my sister and I saw her performing her exercises, we almost busted a gut laughing.
Not to make fun of her; but it's quite amusing to watch.
In fact, lately she has been feeling "more severe" and has not been doing her exercising; I actually miss it.
I bet my 1 year old does too, as she'd sometimes grab his hands and try to dance with him ;)   When we are out at a restaurant (of course it has to be Miguel's or Outback), mom gets so happy when her food comes that she starts singing "yummy yummy yummy in my tummy tummy tummy."
We just have to laugh at mom's childlike giddiness when she's happy.
She has passed on this legacy to our kids and they will occasionally sing the song too; we always chuckle when they do.
Mom has no filter, so there's no telling what will come out of her mouth.
She will tell you random things about her body parts and bodily functions, things from the past that you could've lived without knowing, random tidbits about her intimacy, secrets that she forgot were secret...whatever is on her mind.
It can be downright embarassing at times, but we usually just have to laugh at the over-abundance of information that she shares.
I could tell you some pretty funny stories in this department, but I think some might be a little too personal to share.
I know this may sound odd-to laugh at a time like this-but it is what keeps some sort of sanity in our lives.
Whenever I think of dementia, my mind likens it to raising babies and children.
I've said it over and over, but essentially that is what dementia looks like: a person growing backwards from adolesence to childhood to toddlerhood to infacy.
My children say some pretty off-the-wall things and do things that constantly make me laugh.
Just last week my son created a harness that he wrapped around his waist, hooked to the fridge and began scaling the fridge.
It was a hilarious sight to see.
Of course, after getting a picture, I had to teach him about safety and suggest that repelling off the fridge might not be such a great idea.
If an adult did this sort of thing, we'd think it's crazy.
But if it is a child, we think it's funny.
That's how I look at it with dementia.
Though my mom's behavior and escapades may be crazy for an adult woman to say or do, I am learning to look at her as a child and find the humor in the innocence of what she is saying/doing.
I'm not saying everything is funny.
But to get through this devastating illness, we have to find the funny and have a sense of humor!
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 18, 2012>
My grandfather (my mom's stepdad) was a farmer.
He owned acres of land covered with the most gorgeous orange groves and citrus trees you've ever seen.
And if you thought they looked magnificent, the taste was even more magnificent.
Now that he, and his groves, are gone, eating fruit just isn't the same.
His oranges were the sweetest and juciest you've ever tasted.
His pomegranates were always my favorite-not my mom's favorite, however, because of the stain the juice would leave behind on our clothes.
Grandpa had the most beautiful avocadoes you've ever laid your eyes on.
Truly, they were amazing.
In my family, we LOVE avocadoes and there was no comparison of who had the best avocadoes around.
When you go to the store, you walk out with those sissy-la-la avocadoes, the size of your palm.
Grandpa would bring home avocadoes the size of grapefruits and they were more delicious than any I've ever bought.
Because of the abundance of avocadoes, my grandma had to be creative to use them all up; grandma didn't waste a thing.
Not a thing.
We grew up eating a lot of guacamole, avocadoes on our sandwiches and tacos...when there was still an abundance after that, grandma created a recipe called "Avocado Cream Pie".
It might not sound that appealing, but it won a ribbon at the fair and she had her picture taken for the paper.
The point of my avocado reminiscings: our family is well versed in, and very familiar with, avocadoes.
Last Wednesday night, my dad came over to my house.
He had a somber expression as he walked through the door and right away I could sense that he was feeling a little down about something.
I asked him what was going on.
He scrunched his nose, glanced down at the ground, and then looked me square in the eye and said, "What does mom always like to put on her turkey sandwich?"
I brainstormed some ideas with him: cheese, mayo, tomato, her sub sandwich oil.
He looked at me and said, "Yeah, but what is the one thing that she always loves to put on her turkey sandwiches...always...think about it, something green...?"
And then it dawned on me, "Avocado."
He gave a little frown and said, "I made her a turkey sandwich tonight, put on some avocado for her and she didn't know what it was.
She kept saying 'what is this stuff, I don't want this' and took it off.
I tried explaining to her that it was avocado, the same stuff she put on her tacos last night, but she didn't get it."
That was puzzling to me.
"Are you telling me that she ate avocado on her tacos last night and she didn't know what it was tonight?"
I asked my dad.
"Yep."
We conversed a little more about the issue.
Even after an explanation of avocadoes, mom still could not comprehend what they were.
It's confusing to me that she would know, and enjoy, something one night and not know what it is the next.
As I pondered about this, a thought came to me that perhaps she hasn't completely lost her knowledge of an avocado; if it was presented to her on a taco, she might still remember what it is.
But her association of an avocado in any other form is gone.
She cannot comprehend that avocadoes go on sandwiches because in her mind, their purpose is solely for tacos.
I suppose I will have to test this theory out the next time we have tacos (which should be fairly soon...it is one of her staple foods).
As I reflect back over the past few months, I see how rapidly her comprehension is declining.
At times her lack of knowledge about certain things seems very sudden, such as with the avocado.
It's a little scary and disconcerting.
If she can forget an avocado from one day to the next, will it be that sudden with her forgetting us?
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 11, 2012>
Yesterday, a link was shared on a dementia support facebook page which I belong to.
I followed the link and read an article written by a woman about her mother's struggle with dementia.
It was beautifully written and depicted some of the challenges and heartaches she's faced as her mother's caregiver.
I scrolled down to read comments by other readers, most of whom agreed with the beauty of her writing as they shared some of their own struggles in dealing with this heartbreaking disease.
One critic, however, had a different opinion after reading her article.
He wrote,  "The writing was excellent but I was left with this horrible feeling of having invaded your mother's privacy.
It's as if you allowed all these strangers to peer into your mother's most vulnerable, private moments.
And to what end?
To explain how you coped?
Everyone copes in their own way...I know it's completely your decision to expose your mother in this way.
But I wonder what she would think of this."
This comment really bothered me and I thought about it all throughout the day.
I suppose it's because I, too, have opened up in sharing our moments with my mother.
It caused me to sit back and ponder, am I invading her most vulnerable, private moments?
And "to what end" am I doing this?
Am I wrong for opening up about this?
I thought about it, long and hard.
There is a part of me that wonders if I should be so candid and public about the journey are enduring.
I tend to be a self-doubter, so I admit I felt a little guilt and doubt about what I am doing.
As I continued to think (and maybe even fret a little bit) about it, several thoughts came to my mind to reassure me that this is what I should be doing.
As this critic commented that strangers are viewing her mother's most private, vulnerable moments, I realized that I am not sharing every moment at all.
What I share is really only the surface.
There are far more behaviors and things that she does/says that I could write about, but I am using my discretion in what I post simply because some things are embarasssing to bring up.
Truly, I am not writing about the craziness of my mom; I am writing about the alien that has taken over her body, the alien known as dementia.
I have only the best of intentions with this.
That is what I want my readers to understand most of all.
I am not writing about this for any personal gain.
I am not writing about this to exploit my mom in any way.
In many ways, this isn't even my mom that I am writing about.
This is about a disease that has overtaken my mom.
While yes, I write about her behaviors and her struggles, what people need to understand is that this is not my mom, at least not the "Deana" we all once knew and loved.
While she might be embarassed if in her normal frame of mind over the things that have transpired, she is not in her normal frame of mind any longer and she has no control over herself.
She is no longer accountable for her actions.
THAT is what I am trying to teach people in sharing this journey.
I want people to understand what this disease does.
How many times do we encounter someone who is a bit "cooky" and do not know what to think or how to react?
I want people to gain an understanding and empathy to those they encounter who suffer from this disease.
I want to offer a place of support for those who are going through the same thing.
And only they can understand what I mean by that; it's a difficult thing to go through and for most of us, it helps to read and share with others who are going through the same thing.
Knowledge is power.
We cannot learn if we do not share.
If writing about this journey can help anyone at all in their own personal journey, then it is worth it to me to write.
My mom is an educated woman, she has always enjoyed sharing her knowledge with others.
I do feel that she would be proud, and not ashamed, of what I am doing.
Maybe I'm off base here, but these are the thoughts that continue to come to me when I find myself contemplating the things I write. 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 6, 2012>
Have you ever gone over to visit someone and been greeted by their small child, who is so excited to see you and has been long anticipating your arrival?
They want to show you all their new toys and tell you everything that has happened to them in their lifetime.
Kinda cute at first...then maybe after a while, after you've seen and heard about every stuffed animal and every detail of their day, you're ready to move on with your visit.
I've said it before.
People with dementia become very childlike; my mom being no exception.
She becomes giddy like a child when she's excited and has an innocence about her when she speaks, like a child who doesn't know any better.
Lately, she has been extremely chatty.
She talks a mile a minute.
If I'm being brutally honest, it's enough to drive you a little nutty (bless her heart).
In the moments when my ears feel like they are going to burst from over-stimulation, I remind myself what a good thing it is that she is still talking.
There will come a day when she will not be able to find words any longer.
So for today, I count my blessings.
Tonight I took some crickets over to feed my dad's newts; I was out and about today and picked some up for own newts, so I figured I may as well save him a trip.
My mom answered the door and before I could even get all the way in the door, she was telling me all about her exhilirating trip to Sam's Club.
"Oh you know what's so good too is that I went to Sam's Club today too and got a lot of food stuff too.
Claudia came and we went to Sam's Club so I got a lot of food and the food things the children like too..."  She led me staightway into the kitchen to show me her loot.
"I got a lot of really good things too, and I got those things your son loves, Cody loves, so much too and these other things too that all the grandchildren love too, " she said, as she pointed to the fruity snacks and goldfish crackers.
Without taking much of a breath, she walked over to the counter, where she had a bag of dinner rolls set out.
"And I got those really good bread things too and other bread stuff too.
Oh, and I got the chicken nugget things that I love so much cuz they're so good."
She walked briskly over to the freezer and opened the door to show me it's contents.
With excitement in her voice, she continued, "See, these chicken nuggets, these kind, they're so good too.
I like them so much," she said, pointing to the dinosaur chicken nuggets in the freezer.
Next, she opened the refrigerator, "I got those tomato kinds too which are really good and really healthy too and other things too.
And I got lots of my Ensure too, a big box of it for really cheap, a really good price," she said, nodding her head as she moved back towards the counter.
"It's really a lot and that's good because I'm going to give some to Jeremy too for his birthday because he really loves it so much, but I'll go get more cuz his birthday is at the end of the month and then it's really fresh and new but I'm not gonna give him a big box, no.
I'm just gonna give him some, like 6 of them cuz that'll be enough for him, he really likes them so much."
On a side note: Jeremy is my nephew; he's turning 9 this month and my mom approached me a couple of months ago with a brilliant idea for his birthday present: Ensure, because "he really likes it so much and he's always asking me 'grandma can I have one?'
and his mom won't ever buy him any."
After she showed me all of her goods, she stood in the middle of the kitchen.
Her arms were straight down in front of her, crossed straight over each other with her hands twisted around and held together, fingers overlocking.
She swayed a little, side to side, as she proudly told me, "I did really good too because I got all this really lot of food for only one-hundred-and-nineteen-dollars, about.
And your dad didn't want me spending more than $150 so I did only one-hundred-nineteen so that wasn't as much, so that was good.
And I got 14 things or maybe more for only that price so I did really good too.
Yeah."
She smiled and I told her she did good and that I was happy she got to go to Sam's Club.
After I fed the newts, and talked with my mom for a couple more minutes (about Sam's Club, of course), she grabbed a packet of fruity snacks and handed them to me.
"I wanted to give this gift to Cody too, even though he's probably asleep but I want to give him a gift of this because he likes it so much and he'll be so happy."
I know this may sound silly, but as I stood there, looking at the true joy in my mom's face at sending home those fruity snacks for my son, I felt a little warmth in my heart.
I could see that she felt pride and happiness that she was able to give him something that she knows he really enjoys.
Cody will be thrilled to wake up tomorrow to find his gift from grandma; just as thrilled as grandma was to give him the gift.
It is hard to see someone you love revert back to a childlike state.
Sometimes it leaves me with sadness.
Yet sometimes, if I look hard enough, I find something to smile about.
I can smile that my mom is innocent and that simple things (like shopping at Sam's Club and giving my son his favorite snacks) make her happy.
When I look back on what this devastating disease has done to my beloved mother, these are the moments and the memories that I will choose to remember.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 4, 2012>
"Oh, Jeff is home; why is Jeff home today and not working today?"
Yesterday was Labor Day.
My parents came over late afternoon for our usual Labor Day barbeque.
It was about 4:45 when they arrived; on a regular day, my husband doesn't usually get home from work until 5:30 and she very quickly noticed that he was home before his normal time (I think it's easy for her to remember what time he gets home as it is the same time as her dinnertime).
"Mom, today is Labor Day, remember??"
As I tried to remind my mom about the holiday that lands every first-weekend-of-September, my mom stared intently at the food she placed on the counter and quickly changed the subject, asking about the salad I made, and if it had "tomatoes in it too".
Oddly enough, I had just read a post in my online support group that morning, talking about the very issue of a loved one (with dementia) forgetting what holidays and birthdays are.
So far, my mom has an excellent memory of birthdays and anniversaries.
Every so often she goes to the Dollar Tree to stock up on birthday and anniversary cards for the upcoming months, because "they are such a good price, only a dollar!"
She will fill them out and place them by her bedside a month before the occassion, every day reminding herself and others that so-n-so's birthday is on such-n-such date and "I even have a card to send her too."
She loves to serenade us with song for our special days.
Her favorite, which she recently admitted to me that she sings in her head at bedtime, is the Anniversary song (to the tune "William Tell Overture" by Rossini): "Happy Anniversary,  Happy Anniversary, Happy Anniversary, Haaaaaaa-ppy Anniversary!
Happy Happy Happy Happy Happy Anniversary....." (and on, and on, and on...) Holidays are another issue.
She remembers the big ones: Christmas, Thanksgiving, Easter.
I've noticed that she doesn't seem to remember the smaller holidays, such as Memorial Day or Labor Day.
I remember this past Valentine's day...she was completely confused as to why my dad brought her flowers, "Our anniversary isn't until February 28th."
Even with an explanation, she couldn't seem to recall what Valentine's Day is.
Little by little, she is forgetting the meanings of these significant days.
With the holiday season drawing near, I feel a little bit of despair.
Everything is changing, and it's changing fast.
Last Christmas was so much different than the year before.
What will this Christmas bring?
Is this going to be the last year that she remembers what we are celebrating?
I know that time is precious.
None of us know how much time we have.
I am realizing now, more than ever before in my life, how important it is to make the most of the time we have.
I feel an urgency to make this holiday season spectacular, and to make as many memories as possible. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 31, 2012>
Today I'm talking about steps 5 & 6 to prevent Alzheimer's.
If you missed steps 1 & 2, click here.
If you missed steps 3 & 4, click here.
STEP 5: Brain Push-Ups Yes, we are talking about real push ups, here.
Exercise helps to increase the blood flow to the brain.
When blood flows to the brain, new brain cells grow.
It is important, however, to use the proper form while doing push-ups; no "girl" version!
This means legs extended, shoulder width apart.
Clench those buttock muscles and flex your abs, engaging your entire core.
Dr. Fotuhi, guest doctor on the Dr. Oz show, believes that doing even 7 push ups a day can increase the blood flow to lower your risk of Alzheimer's.
That's not too bad now, is it?
STEP 6: The Brain Diet Diet is important in every aspect of your help, and brain/memory is no exception!
Something I learned from Dr. Oz: As your belly grows, your brain shrinks.
So keep that belly flat and keep your brain large and in charge!
There are specific foods that have been known to help certain parts of the brain.
Here are the "superfoods" for memory.
1.
Elderberries: berries in general are good for brain health, as they provide antioxidants.
Elderberries are especially good for brain health as they contain an ingredient called quercetin.
Quercetin helps to boost your cell's mitochondria, which is considered the "powerhouse" within your cells.
It also helps to reduce harmful inflammation in the cells.
I have found it a bit challenging to find Elderberries at regular grocery stores.
They do have syrups and jams in Elderberry form; I would check a specialty store (such as a Trader Joe's).
I was surprised to find quite a good variety of Elderberry jam on Amazon as well.
Doesn't get any easier than that!
2.
Pecans: This is good news for me, as I LOVE pecans!
Pecans are high in omega-3's, which are essential for a healthy brain.
Pecans are the highest antioxidant tree nut and are ranked on the top 15 highest foods with antioxidants.
Studies show that foods rich in omega 3's, such as pecans, can decrease the risk of neural degeneration dramatically.
3.
Chicken Giblets or Clams: Yes, that's right.
You know those innards of the chicken that you normally throw out?
The liver, kidneys, heart...those are giblets, and they are a great source of Vitamin B12.
It may sound disgusting, but it's said that they can actually be delicious if cooked right.
Just 1 cup of giblets provides 228% of your daily B12.
Clams are known to be high in zinc and iron, which helps the brain to recall information.
Not my personal fave...I may have to stick to the giblets.
;) 4.
Vegetable Juice: It just goes without saying that vegetables are loaded with vitamins and antioxidants.
You can make your own or buy some from the store; if you buy some from the store, make sure you choose one that has no added sugar.
It's wise to limit your juice intake to 8 oz.
a day, to limit your sugars.
5.
Beets: Beets have natural nitrates (along with cabbages and radishes); this helps to increase poor blood flow, which tends to become an issue with aging.
If you're like me, you might be wondering how in the heck you eat a beet.
I did not grow up eating beets, so I admit I'm not exactly sure what to do with them!
However, I have learned the art of purees and hiding them in foods.
Beets are one of those veggies that I've pureed and added into muffin batter or smoothies.
It's a great way to get that "superfood" in your diet!
This concludes my 6 steps to preventing Alzheimer's.
Like I said, it's not a "cure all" solution; if you are genetically predisposed to get it then you may just be out of luck.
However, I do believe that you might be able to prolong it, and maybe in some instances prevent it, by establishing healthier lifestyle patterns now.
Like I said, I'm not a doctor.
But it makes sense to me that living healthier lifestyles can help us to avoid may ailments that could come our way.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 30, 2012>
Today I am going to give you steps 3 & 4 on how to prevent dementia.
If you missed my post from yesterday, click here.
Step 3: The 777 Stress Bust Stress is not a good thing, as we know.
It can cause all kinds of health problems.
Turns out, stress is also bad for your hippocampus, the region in the brain responsible for memory.
Stress leads to high levels of cortisol, which is like poison to the hippocampus.
Practicing good relaxation techniques is good for your hippocampus, and your memory!
Dr. Oz recommended the 7-7-7 technique.
Three times a day, give yourself a moment to take in deep breaths; breathe in while counting to 7, hold your breath for 7 seconds, and finish by exhaling for 7 seconds.
Supposedly this method has shown results to reduce stress and increase the size of the hippocampus if practiced over an 8 week period.
Don't be afraid to relax and take a "time out" when life situations become stressful.
My personality is one that has to always keep busy.
Sometimes it's hard to make myself sit down and relax, but sometimes that's exactly what I need!
Make sure to make some time for you, to just kick your feet up and take a break!
You owe it to your health!!
Step 4: Tease Your Memory Do things out of the ordinary to boost your memory.
One idea Dr. Oz presented was to memorize your grocery list.
He showed that the mind has the ability to memorize lists of 20-30 things.
He presented an audience member, on his show, who was given a mock grocery list of 20 things to memorize.
He taught her to associate things with each item.
For example, if eggs were on her grocery list, she could use a visual image of a chicken laying eggs in it's coop.
The next item on the list might be rice.
She could picture the farmer feeding his chickens rice; the chickens eat the rice and then return to their coop to lay eggs.
It could continue on and on as you build a story around your list and associate the items with a visual reminder.
As his audience member practiced this method and returned to show off her memorization skills she had acquired, she recited each of the 20 items on her list without skipping a beat!!
I wonder if this method still works when you have little kids tugging on your coat tails while shopping???
I'll have to test that one out ;)  There are many games and puzzles out there that can help in "teasing" your memory as well.
I was just talking to my mother-in-law the other day about this very thing.
One of her favorite games to play on her handheld Nintendo DS is a game called "Brain Age".
This game quizzes your brain on certain memory exercises.
Games such as these can help to keep your mind active and tease your memory.
Tomorrow I will finish up with steps 5 & 6 on how to improve your memory health!
To view part 3, click here. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 29, 2012>
Ever since I watched the movie "The Notebook", I have had this fear about either my husband or myself developing dementia later on in life.
What a horrible thing it would be to lose one's memory of everyone and everything they hold dear.
Never did I imagine that my own mother would be struck down by this awful disease, and especially at a such a young age.
Even though her form of dementia has no genetic links, there is always a fear deep, down inside that it will happen to me.
A few months ago, after we received my mom's diagnosis, Dr. Oz had a show about "Ways to Prevent Alzheimer's".
Alzheimer's is a form of dementia, so I recorded the show in hopes of finding some ways that I can prevent this awful disease from affecting me (and to see if there was any hope to restore for my mom).
Now, I don't necessarily believe that you can 100% prevent this disease.
If you are genetically predispositioned to get it, it may be out of your hands.
With that said, I do believe that it's possible that things in our environment could be contributing to all of the diseases that we see among us today.
Cancer, dementia, diabetes, etc...all of these illnesses are on the rise.
And while many are genetically "destined" to have these illnesses, there may be others who can prevent bringing these sicknesses upon themselves simply by living a healthier lifestyle.
I'm not a doctor, but much of what Dr. Oz and his colleague had to say made sense.
The nature of dementia is that the brain begins to shrink.
The hippocampus is the part of the brain that controls memory, and the rule of thumb is: the bigger the better!
It would make sense that if we can prevent our brain from shrinking, we can prevent diseases caused by shrinkage (such as dementia).
Like I said, genetics play a big role in this.
But there are some things we can do to help prevent or prolong this shrinkage from happening.
Dr. Oz listed 6 steps that we can take to stimulate our brains and help to keep our brains from shrinking, preventing dementia.
I want to spend the next few days sharing some of what he said; take it for what it's worth ;) STEP 1: Take a Memory Boosting Supplement Everyday The supplement that he recommended was a DHA memory boosting supplement.
DHA is an omega-3 fatty acid which makes up a large portion of your brain.
Lower DHA levels are associated with smaller brain size.
DHA also increases blood flow to the brain.
Studies have shown that people who take 600 mg of DHA supplements every day, over a period of 6 months, will boost their brain so much that it functions as if it is 3 years younger!
You better believe I will be taking these supplements everyday!
STEP 2: Do Brain Stimulating Switch-Ups Sometimes we need to switch things up, just to keep the brain active and thinking.
By "switching it up", different parts of the brain are exercised.
When I was in junior high, my best friend and I used to write mirror messages to each other.
Little did I know that I was working my brain to prevent Alzheimer's!
One of the suggestions was to write backwards (such a mirror messaging), or to write or eat with the other hand.
Other suggestions include wearing your watch on the other hand, switching hands while brushing your teeth, or swapping hands when brushing your hair (I have yet to try this one...I don't need any more bad hair days than I already have!
Ha ha).
I could continue on with all 6 today...but I'd rather spread it out over the next couple of days.
Besides, my kids are home from school and ready to tackle some homework!
Tune in tomorrow as I continue with steps 3 & 4 on preventing dementia!
To view steps 3 & 4, click here.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 28, 2012>
There comes a point, in every dementia patient, that constant care becomes an issue.
They can function for years on their own (depending on the form and progression of their disease), but at some point it becomes necessary to bring in outside help.
My dad and I had a deep conversation (about a week ago) discussing life, our situation with my mom and the future.
We talked about some tough issues, not all of which I will share.
One topic happened to be about bringing in outside help.
My mom seems to be doing okay functioning on her own throughout the day; but then again, nobody is really there all day to supervise her and see exactly what goes on.
We know that she takes her medicine, naps and plays games on the computer.
Occassionally she will do dishes or a load of laundry.
What else does she do with her day?
There have been a couple of issues that have been concerning us as well.
For instance, she had one of her medications switched; she does not feel like it is working to help her headaches, so she started taking some over-the-counter medicine as well.
Not a big deal...except that one day we found her taking more medication before she was supposed to, because "it's not working".
Obviously that could become an issue with overdosing.
We've noticed more and more that she is subsituting meals with Ensure.
I suppose it's good that she's getting something in her system (I know this can be a struggle for many people, and Ensure is one solution for the problem).
However, she complains of an upset stomach frequently, which I believe could be due to medications and a liquid diet.
We have been trying to make sure that she is eating at least 2 solid meals (lunch and dinner) and leaving the Slim Fast or Ensure for breakfast.
A couple weeks ago we were over at their house for family dinner.
I had plugged in the rice cooker and was filling up the rice cooker pot with water.
My mom came along and put her hand inside the outer shell of the cooker (which was hot).
She freaked out and ran to the sink, rinsing her hand under cold water; I'm not sure what would posess her to put her hand inside the cooker.
Later that night, she was washing some food down the garbage disposal and something slipped down the drain into the disposal.
She put her hand in the sink as if she was going to put it down the drain to retrieve whatever had fallen.
I quickly yelled at her to turn off the garbage disposal, which she did.
Luckily, everything was okay.
These may be small, isolated incidences, but it seems like mom is becoming more careless and clumsy.
While she may not be putting herself in direct danger right now, we want to make sure that it does not escalate to that point before we realize there's a problem.
After discussing matters with my dad, we decided it would be a good idea to get some people over there during the day.
There are few intentions with this: 1.
Keep her company so she is not sitting in front of the computer all day long.
2.
Observe her and make sure that she is safe and eating properly.
3.
Help clean up around the house-it has been an overwhelming task for my dad to keep up on the housework, and mom is unable to perform her tasks that she once engaged in so faithfully.
(If you missed my post about housecleaning, you can read about it by clicking here).
This is the hard part, getting people over there.
I have spent the past couple weeks going over (a couple times per week) to visit and help clean.
Mom does not comprehend the reasoning behind my coming over, so I just tell her I am there to help her clean and to visit with her.
Each time I go, mom asks, "Why do you feel like you always have to come over here to help me when you have your own house to take care of?"
By 1:00, she is practically kicking me out the door, because "it's time for my nap and your kids are too noisy."
(On a side note...my one year old is generally asleep in the back room and I put a movie on for my 4 year old during this time, so it's really not too noisy).
Nevertheless, I insist that it will be fine for her to take a nap, assure her that she does not have to entertain me, and that I will continue cleaning up until I need to leave to get my other kids from school.
She is a little resistant, and I was a little unsure if I should stick around.
After talking with dad, however, we concluded that she is going to have to get used to having people around and to continue to stay there for our allotted time to help, despite her resistance.
In my observations, I have noticed a couple of things that need to be addressed for anyone who is there caring for her during the day.
One is mealtime.
When she makes herself a meal (especially if it is left overs from the fridge), the food needs to be inspected to assure that it is okay.
She has attempted to eat rotting food and is unable to tell when things have gone bad; my dad and I are trying our best to keep up on cleaning the contents of the fridge weekly.
Something else to watch her on is the mail.
She likes to check the mail everyday and occassionally open things and misplaces them.
I think she's finally beginning to understand that she is supposed to leave the mail on the couch for my dad, but if her name is on it, she will open it.
She doesn't understand most of what she is reading.
Yesterday she got junk mail from a jeweler.
She had a look of puzzlement on her face as she questioningly repeated, "So-n-so Jewelry?"
(I forgot the name of the Jeweler) "Huh?
I don't know what so-n-so Jewelry is...why are they sending me this??"
I told her it was junk, she could toss it.
She replied with, "No, I have to leave it here for your dad."
Good girl ;) For now, I have committed to going over 1-2 times a week.
My job is organizing, decluttering and of course monitoring and visiting.
I have an Aunt who volunteered to go over on Thursdays.
I let her know our monitoring issues and asked that she can just help keep up on some surface cleaning (dusting, bathrooms, etc).
My mom still likes to load her own dishwasher, so we leave that job for her ;) I have another Aunt and Uncle, who are on vacation for a few weeks, who have said they would try to come over once a week to do the same.
That gives us help 3-4 times a week for now, which I think is sufficient at this point.
Taking care of someone with dementia can be daunting, at times.
I know it will only continue to become more difficult.
I just hope and pray that we will have the support of our family when the time comes that she will need true, 24 hour, round-the-clock care.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 25, 2012>
I wanted to make mention of a couple of things on my blog, for those who don't follow my facebook page.
First, my family is participating in a "Walk To End Alzheimer's" in honor of my mom.
I have a goal to raise $500 for this walk.
So far I have collected $305 (with a few others who have said they will mail their donation in)...which means I am almost at my goal.
If you feel inclined to sponsor me in this walk, please click here to visit my Walk Page.
The money raised goes towards research, support/resources for families affected and eventually a cure for Alzheimer's.
My mom does not have Alzheimer's, but it all falls under the umbrella of dementia.
I haven't yet found a walk for FTD, and I figure doing something is better than doing nothing!!
Also, I have nominated my dad to receive a free cruise.
The contest is specifically for caregivers.
I can think of no one more deserving than my dad!
Aside from caring for my mom, he took care of my grandpa every single day, many nights getting no sleep before going to work the next day, as he was dying of Lou Gehrig's.
He is one of the most selfless, giving people I know and I would love to lift his spirits and help him to win this vacation.
The contest started in July and ends on September 15th.
YOU CAN VOTE EVERYDAY!!!!
(once a day) Please bookmark the link and go back to vote everyday!
I just nominated him a couple of days ago and he's already ranked #64 out of 1,038 contestants.
That tells me we have a good chance of moving up fast if everyone takes an extra minute out of their day to vote!
CLICK HERE to go directly to my dad's page, and vote for him!
Thank you all for your continued support and friendship for our family through this difficult time.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 23, 2012>
When I was growing up, my mom was an immaculate housekeeper.
I mean it.
You could take a white glove to any part of her house at any given time and it would remain white.
Saturdays were her cleaning days.
We did our jobs during the week as well, believe you me!
But every single Saturday was deep cleaning day.
Every square inch of the house was dusted, vacuumed, scrubbed, mopped.
She wouldn't do anything "fun" until all the chores were done.
She had us trained, too.
On Saturdays, we were not allowed to go out to play or hang out with friends until our assigned chore was completed.
If it didn't meet her satisfaction, we were sent back in to redo the job.
Over the past couple of years, my mom's house has been less than immaculate.
At first, it was clutter piles building up.
Around the time this started, my grandparents died and my dad was bringing home and sorting through their things; my grandma was a hoarder, so it was more than just a couple of boxes of stuff, to say the least.
We chalked the mess up to grandma and grandpa's "stuff".
As time went on, we began noticing more than just clutter.
The first time I realized that there was a real problem was when I went to use the bathroom and discovered mold in the toilet.
I couldn't believe my eyes!
How could this have happened???
My mom would NEVER allow such uncleanliness in her house!
The more and more time went on, the less and less housework seemed to be getting done.
Soon, dust was settling on picture frames and furniture.
Floors went longer and longer between moppings.
Dishes were beginning to pile on the counters for, sometimes, days before she would tend to them.
It seemed she had completely forgotten the jobs that needed to get done.
When we would bring the topic up for discussion, mom just complained that she was too tired and sweaty to finish her tasks, or she would make comments such as, "Yeah I did dust the pictures before," not seeming to realize that this is an ongoing task.
I watched my dad struggle to keep a balance with work and the new roles he was having to assume.
Mom and dad always had very traditional roles in our home: dad went to work and mom took care of the home.
My dad has always worked long, hard days (in the construction business) and mom was more than happy to take care of the rest of the household duties, along with the help of us kids.
I can remember a time or two seeing my dad scrub toilets or do some dishes, but for the most part he's never had to worry about that role.
A few months ago, I realized that we, as a family, needed to step in and take some of this burden off of my dad.
I made a goal to go over once a week to help with some housecleaning.
I started out doing well...and then summer came and I had all 5 kids at home with me!
A couple of times, I took the kids with me to help with some of the chores.
One day, as I worked on decluttering and organizing bookshelves, my two teenagers gave the kitchen a good scrub down.
They started by unloading and loading the dishwasher before cleaning the stove and countertops.
My mom came in and just about had a conniption fit.
"What are you doing?
Those dishes are clean," she said when she saw the girls loading the dishwasher.
Upon explanation, she turned to the cabinet to inspect the clean dishes that were just put away.
"No!
You're not doing it right!
These are still wet, now you're messing them up!
I leave them in there for many hours to dry.
I have my own way to do this, too!
And I have my own way of putting in the dishes, too.
You're not doing it right!"
I tried to talk calmly to her and assure her that the girls were only trying to help.
"No!"
was the answer she continued to give, with a disapproving shake of her head.
I admit, I felt a little defensive of my girls.
They were giving time out of their summer to come over and help, and I was afraid mom might have hurt their feelings.
Luckily, as I later apologized to the girls for my mom's reaction, they were very loving and forgiving.
"It's okay.
We know it's not her fault, she doesn't mean it."
Eventually, I was able to calm mom down and convince her to leave the kitchen-only after reassuring her that I would make sure all the dishes were dried and put away in the right places.
As you can see, there's been a learning to curve to helping mom.
I'm slowly learning which chores I can take on, and which I should leave for my mom.
The chores she continues to do are dishes (though they will sit for a couple days sometimes), laundry and she will vacuum the living room rug.
Occassionally she will clean the toilet in her bathroom.
It is a short list, and she only works in 10-15 minute intervals before she gets too tired and too sweaty and needs to lay down for a rest.
She's more likely to get off the couch and work when someone else is over there working, so I feel like me being over there is good motivation to get her doing something productive, even if it's only for short intervals.
As I've been over there this week, I have focused on decluttering and organizing.
I've thrown out several boxes of trash and started another big box to give to Goodwill.
I've been able to finish 2 bedrooms, the Tupperware cupboard, and the towel/sheet cupboard.
At the beginning, mom uneasily paced nearby to make sure I wasn't messing anything up or throwing anything important out.
Occassionally she would get in my way, on a quest to look for something.
Eventually, she retreated to the office where played her computer game until naptime.
My new goal is to go over once or twice a week to finish decluttering and organizing the house.
I'm also going over to observe mom and make sure she's okay by herself throughout the day, which I'll write about another day (I know, I said that in the last post, too).
Other family members have offered to come over and help as well...we'll see how that goes.
I think if I focus on the organization issues, anyone else can focus on the surface cleaning.
Hopefully, we can relieve at least some of the stress that has been placed on my dad since this whole journey has begun. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 20, 2012>
When I sit down to write, I usually have a clear idea of which direction I want to take my post.
Tonight, I don't even know where to start.
It's been an emotional day as reality is beginning to sink in on what is to come with this horrible disease.
I am fighting back the tears even now, as I write.
Today, I went over to my mom's house-partly to observe her (I'll write more about this another day), and partly to help her organize some of the clutter that is overtaking her house.
Mom has been asking me to help her organize her photos.
She has most of them organized in boxes, which she started long before she was "sick".
She wanted me to help her find my old school pictures and duplicates of baby photos so I could take them home.
As I brought out a large storage tub of family pictures, and began rummaging through them, my mom sat on the couch, watching me sort.
She picked up a large envelope of pictures and pulled out a large photo of a baby boy and girl, sitting side by side, and said, "I wish I could remember who all these people are."
It took me a minute to catch my breath.
I stared at her for a few seconds and replied, matter-of-factly, "Mom, it's me and Joe."
I felt very confused, how could she forget the faces of her twin babies??
I thought maybe it was a fluke.
Maybe she wasn't paying enough attention or she got confused.
Or maybe I knew, but I just wasn't ready to accept it.
As we continued sorting, I occassionally quizzed her on who different people were in the pictures we came across.
It broke my heart to watch her struggle to remember the faces of the people she loves so dearly.
"Looks familiar...it's not Joe, is it?"
she asked, as I showed her a picture of her firstborn grandbaby.
Jeremy was her pride and joy.
She doted on him like any proud grandma you've ever seen.
She always loved this picture, in his little vest and adorable coordinating hat (she even helped picked it out, if I remember correctly).
This picture hung on her filing cabinet at work for years as she was filled with great pride to show off her grandson.
We finally found some of my school pictures.
This was my Kindergarten class picture?
Can you pick me out in the crowd?
My mom was very confused when she saw the picture.
She was expecting to see me as an adult.
Maybe it's because I used to work for the school district, and she had many class photos of her own with her class.
She squinted at the picture, pointed at teacher and said, "That's not you, is it?"
"Mom, this picture was taken in 1986.
I was only 5 years old," I said back.
"Oh...I'm confused, I don't see you in this picture."
She ran her finger over each and every kid in the class 3 times before her finger finally rested on the girl in the front row donning a red, velvet, jumper dress.
"That one is me, mom," I said, reassuring her that she found the right girl.
It seemed that almost every picture of the past that I presented to her brought on confusion.
If the person looked vastly different than they do today, she did not recognize them.
Obviously we look very different now than we did as babies.
Her memory of how we looked at that time seems to have disappeared.
I even showed her a picture of herself, in her younger years, that she could not recognize.
"Is this you?"
she asked, as she glanced at me, then back at the picture.
"No," she answered her own question.
"But it's reddish hair too but I don't remember who that is."
When I told her that it was her, she answered with, "I don't recall ever looking like that."
I thought for sure she would recognize this picture: the love of her life, my dad.
I showed her one of the favorites of dad, taken when he was 15 years old, sporting a wooden bead necklace which he later gave to her.
We used to love this picture when we were kids, chuckling that dad had long hair and was wearing a necklace!
I was sure this picture would do the trick.
"Hmmm...I don't know.
Kind of reddish hair too...I don't know who this is..." When I told her it was dad, she said, "No.
That's not him.
I don't remember him looking like that."
That was the point that reality smacked me square in the face.
My mom's memory is being erased.
She is forgetting the ones she's loved the most.
Sure, it's just faces of the past that she can't recall.
But what is to come in the future?
My heart aches that my mom cannot recognize my face in the past.
I can't imagine the pain that will come when the day is here that she does not recognize me in the present.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 19, 2012>
I read a link today with a scale for stages and progression for dementia.
I posted it to my facebook page, but I thought it would be helpful to post it here as well, for those who do not follow my facebook page.
I copied it directly from Dementia Care Central; check this website for more information on dementia.
Global Deterioration Scale for Assessment of Primary Degenerative Dementia (GDS) (also known as the Reisberg Scale):  Stage 1: No Dementia No Cognitive Decline In this stage the person functions normally, has no memory loss, and is mentally healthy.
People with NO dementia would be considered to be in Stage 1.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Stage 2: No Dementia Very Mild Cognitive Decline  This stage is used to describe normal forgetfulness associated with aging; for example, forgetfulness of names and where familiar objects were left.
Symptoms are not evident to loved ones or the physician.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Stage 3: No Dementia Mild Cognitive Decline This stage includes increased forgetfulness, slight difficulty concentrating, decreased work performance.
People may get lost more often or have difficulty finding the right words.
At this stage, a person's loved ones will begin to notice a cognitive decline.
Average duration: 7 years before onset of dementia ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Stage 4: Early Stage Moderate Cognitive Decline This stage includes difficulty concentrating, decreased memory of recent events, and difficulties managing finances or traveling alone to new locations.
People have trouble completing complex tasks efficiently or accurately and may be in denial about their symptoms.
They may also start withdrawing from family or friends, because socialization becomes difficult.
At this stage a physician can detect clear cognitive problems during a patient interview and exam.
Average duration: 2 years ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Stage 5: Mid-Stage Moderately Severe Cognitive Decline People in this stage have major memory deficiencies and need some assistance to complete their daily activities (dressing, bathing, preparing meals).
Memory loss is more prominent and may include major relevant aspects of current lives; for example, people may not remember their address or phone number and may not know the time or day or where they are.
Average duration: 1.5 years ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Stage 6: Mid-Stage Severe Cognitive Decline (Middle Dementia) People in Stage 6 require extensive assistance to carry out daily activities.
They start to forget names of close family members and have little memory of recent events.
Many people can remember only some details of earlier life.
They also have difficulty counting down from 10 and finishing tasks.
Incontinence (loss of bladder or bowel control) is a problem in this stage.
Ability to speak declines.
Personality changes, such as delusions (believing something to be true that is not), compulsions (repeating a simple behavior, such as cleaning), or anxiety and agitation may occur.
Average duration: 2.5 years ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Stage 7: Late-Stage Very Severe Cognitive Decline (Late Dementia) People in this stage have essentially no ability to speak or communicate.
They require assistance with most activities (e.g., using the toilet, eating).
They often lose psychomotor skills, for example, the ability to walk.
Average duration: 2.5 years ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ This chart is geared more towards those affected by Alzheimer's.
It's hard to estimate with my mom exactly where she's at, although UCLA said that she was "moderately advanced".
The symptoms and progression differ with each form of dementia, but if I were to guesstimate which stage she is in, I would say between 5 and 6.
If you suspect your loved one has dementia, please visit this site for more information on the disease.
Or visit my resources page for more helpful links.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 16, 2012>
Have you ever been a driver, in your car, with a passenger who tells you every move you need to make?
They may tell you to 'turn here', 'move to that lane over there', 'you need to slow down'...
Since my mom has lost her license, she has become the WORST backseat driver that I've had the experience of driving ;)  I think a large part of this is her expressing her opinion of what a great driver she is.
She is still adamant that UCLA was wrong, and that she's a perfectly safe driver.
She reviews all the rules of the road while we are out and about, I'm sure to prove what a good driver she is.
She will often make comments, "See even I don't go fast over the speed limit like you do and like your dad does too".
"I remember what those things are right there, what they mean too, it means to stop.
I don't know why they cancelled my driving, I'm still really good and still know all the rules."
"You're going a little bit over the lines too, and your dad does that too, and I don't even do that 'cause I'm still such a really safe driver".
"You need to get over to that lane over there now, you're gonna turn up there at the light so I always get over to the other lane right here" (she will say this miles before we need to turn and becomes insistent that I change lanes right away).
Her memory on how to get to places she visits often is still intact.
This is classic with FTD.
I don't know whether this is a blessing or a curse.
Because she knows exactly how to get somewhere, she insists that you take her way.
If you deviate from her course, she becomes really upset.
I learned this, one day, as I was driving her to the pharmacy.
The distance from her house to the pharmacy is maybe a mile.
There are several different ways to get there; you can take the main street or you can go the back way through the neighborhood.
Even going the back way through the neighborhood leaves you with three different options of streets to turn on.
On this particular trip, I turned down the "wrong" street.
"Where are you going??!
You were supposed to turn that way!
It's shorter that way!
Why are you going this way??"
Her back stiffened, she sat up straight and turned her body toward the window, peering out the window at the course I had strayed from.
I replied, "Mom it's okay.
This street will take me there too.
Besides, I'm pretty sure this way is shorter."
She was not to be convinced.
"It is NOT!
That's the best way to go, you're going the long way!
You need to go down that other street!"
I tried to calmly assure her that we were fine; either way would get us to the pharmacy and either way we took, it would only be quicker by a matter of seconds.
She would not let the issue go.
Finally, she hollered at me, "You're just like your dad!"
And with that, she slumped down into her seat and crossed her arms sternly across her chest.
Just as her memory for driving familiar routes has been preserved, so has her memory of her past, particularly her childhood.
It amazes me how she can recall events from her childhood clear as crystal, yet her memory of what everyday objects are is rapidly declining.
I suppose it is just the area of the brain that has been affected.
Semantic memory includes a general knowledge of things, not concerning specific events.
Semantic refers to the memory of meanings and understanding.
For now, her memory of events are intact, though even those will fade over time.
Mom was born and raised in Riverside.
As we drive around town to run errands, she has memories attached to every place we drive by.
And she shares each and every memory with us as we drive her around.
As I drove her downtown one day, she recalled in some detail a tire shop that was down the road which her friend's family had owned.
"Did I ever tell you about the tire shop down that way?
The owner people lived down the street when I was a child.
I've thought about stopping by there sometime, but now that I'm no longer a driver I can't unless you would take me by there sometime, but you probably wouldn't want to do that.
But I would tell them I'm a Harrington too and they would remember me too.
They always really liked me too."
She loves to drive by Overland Street, where her and my dad were neighbors at 13 and 14 years old.
There are many memories attached to that part of town, and she loves to reminisce about the good 'ol days.
My mom is the second one in from the left, and my dad is the shirtless rebel sitting on the hood of the car ;) As I drove her to get her hair cut today, she talked the entire time about memories of different places we passed, all stemming back to her childhood.
I could hardly get a word in; and even if I did say something, she didn't seem to notice.
Most times, I just give the occassional nod and "uh huh" or generic "that's nice" type of comments.
She seems content to talk and have someone to listen.
Often times, one memory will spark another.
For example, as we drove through La Sierra she remembered a restaurant that once stood on the corner of the intersection which made her remember her ex-boyfriend.
"It was a really yummy Mexican food place too, one of those fast food type places too.
And I remember those Mexican boys that I dated too 'cause the Mexican boys always really liked me too.
And there was the one I dated before your dad and I got back together and he turned out to be not such a nice person too and he was in that war thing" (the military) "so I'm really glad that we broke up too and that I was with your dad again, because he's so good..." She rambled on for several minutes sharing her memories and thoughts about that time period of her life.
Many of the things we hear, while driving her about, are repeated over and over.
I am well versed on the history of her life in Riverside and consequently, much of her childhood.
Sometimes, I admit, it gets a little old.
But other times, such as today, I remind myself that it's a great thing that she is able to remember parts of her life.
The day will come when she no longer remembers.
So I remind myself to enjoy the moments that we have, while she is still able to speak and share these meaningful memories of her life. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 13, 2012>
Taking little kids out in public can, at times, be very embarassing.
Around the time my daughter, Aubrey, turned 3 years old, she began noticing people and different characterstics of their appearance.
She was not quiet in voicing what was on her mind.
The first time this happened was when we were sitting in the waiting room of the doctor's office for her baby brother's six week check-up.
A very "busty" woman walked in and checked in with the doctor next to ours.
Aubrey took one look at this voluptuous woman, and with wide eyes, turned to me and declared, "Mommy, she has really big boobs!!"
The next incident was the following day, when I took her with me for my own check-up.
We were in the elevator, heading up to the third floor of the doctor's office with a very friendly, older, and heavy set lady with a walker.
She made some conversation with Aubrey as we went up and when the door opened, we politely let her step out first.
As she made her way out, her back end facing us, Aubrey exclaimed, "Mommy, her butt is so big!"
A few minutes later, after we had checked in with the receptionist, and as I hid myself away from this dear lady in the waiting room to prevent further humiliation, Aubrey noticed a man sitting across from us.
"He is WAY bigger than you, mommy," she said, pointing her tiny finger at the man.
Two days later, we stopped by Burger King for dinner.
A young, black girl stood in front of us in line.
Aubrey looked at her for a couple minutes, then told me (and the rest of Burger King), "Mommy, her skin is brown!"
After four incidences in the course of a few days, I was ready to hide away in my house and never take her out in public again.
I was shocked and mortified at the words that came out of my daughter's mouth.
After each incident, I took the opportunity to explain, as best I could to an innocent three-year-old, that the things she was saying were not appropriate and could hurt people's feelings.
Try as I might, the fact of the matter is simple: kids have no filter!
People with dementia are very much the same: they have no filter.
At least this is the case with my mom's form of dementia.
Whatever is on their mind is on their tongue.
The difference with children and with dementia patients is that children are teachable.
Eventually they learn how to behave.
Lucky for me, my daughter is smart; after this long and embarassing week of incidences, we had some talks and she came to understand that those comments make people feel sad or embarassed.
A dementia person will not understand this concept, no matter how hard you try to teach them how to behave properly!
The more the disease progresses, the worse it becomes.
I find myself (as does my family) tense up a little bit when we take her out because we don't know what-off-the wall thing she will say or do.
A few weeks ago, I took her to the grocery store.
I, of course, picked the shortest line to check out.
Mom was disappointed because she loves Beverley, a cashier who has been there for years.
Not to worry, though.
She made sure to call to Beverley from across the store (as everyone in her line observed).
"Beverley!
My spiritual sister!"
She continued after she checked out and quickly walked over to Beverley, "I really believe that you are my spiritual sister, too.
In my religion, we're all brothers and sisters too so you are like my sister spiritually."
Sometimes, while we are checking out, she will bring up random topics or completely ignore the cashier's questions or conversations altogether.
While she can still communicate what is on her mind, she can't comprehend much of what is being said to her.
Most times, I find myself speaking for her when a cashier or sales representative is asking her a question.
I think most times people can figure out that there's something not quite right.
Other times, however, I get the look that says, "I wasn't talking to you."
This happened one day at Kohl's.
Mom was trying to use her coupons as she checked out.
She had two coupons: one was a 15% off when using her Kohl's card, the other was 20% off a purchase of $100 or more without using the Kohl's card.
Of course, she wanted to use the 20% off, but she didn't comprehend that she couldn't use her Kohl's card for it (and she was adamant to use the Kohl's card).
Aside from the card issue, mom was using a combination of gift cards along with the credit card, so her total after the gift card was less than $100.
Therefore, she couldn't use the 20% off coupon at all.
The cashier tried explaining this to her, but mom couldn't make sense of what she was saying.
I then tried explaining it to her myself with the same result.
I finally turned to the cashier and told her that she would just use the 15% off coupon with her Kohl's card.
The cashier ignored me and turned back to my mom, seeming a little flustered that she wasn't "getting it".
I finally interjected and said in a low voice, "She doesn't understand what you're saying, she has dementia."
The cashier's attitude immediately changed and she turned her attention to me, listening to what I had prompted her to do.
She was patient with mom through the rest of her transaction.
Even though my mom didn't hear or understand what I was saying to cashier, I still hate to say it in front of her.
Who knows what she hears and understands deep down?
And I don't want her to feel embarassed or stupid.
In Susan's book (I've mentioned her book before, you can read that post here), she talks about the "oops card".
Basically, it's a card that you hand to people while out with your loved one explaining that they have a disability and can't understand you.
After this and several other incidences, my family and I decided it was time to make our own "oops" cards.
There are a few ways to skin a cat.
The suggestion Susan made in her book was to go to the association for frontotemporal lobe dementia.
There are templates that you can use and print them out on cards at home, using premade cards, such as these: The other option is to order your own through a printing company.
I used vistaprint, since they are free (aside from shipping).
And they also have cute templates :) Our cards read, "Please be patient with my companion.
She has a brain disease called semantic dementia, which makes it difficult for her to communicate and understand what you are saying."
I feel like this is a less embarassing approach for my mom while we are out, to help other people to understand and be patient with her while we interact with them.
The only regret I have is not addressing the behavior aspect on the card.
One of the template suggestions from the AFT is to write "(s)he is not drunk or on drugs, (s)he has a disease..." With the embarassing behaviors, and stares from onlookers, this bit of information might have been helpful to include on the card.
Oh well...next time.
My hope is by handing out these cards, people will be more patient with my mom.
But along with that, I hope to raise awareness on this disease.
How many times are we out in our daily lives and see people acting a little "off"?
Do we ever stop and wonder if there might be something more to their strangeness, such a disease that alters their behavior?
Knowledge is power.
As is awareness.
So this whole post got me to thinking...I wonder if I can get these cards made up for my kids???
;)
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 9, 2012>
Exactly 9 years ago today, I married my best friend and the love of my life, Jeff.
Over the past few weeks, I've been reflecting back to that time of my life; back when life was at an all-time high, back before I had lost any of my grandparents, back before my mom was sick.
Life was simple.
Life was happy.
Life was good.
It brings tears to my eyes to see pictures of my mom at that time and remember what a great friend and mother she was.
She truly was one of my best friends.
I could talk to her about anything.
I am grateful that I have had her as my mother.
Not a day goes by that I don't miss her for the way she once was.
Life is precious.
In an instant, everything can change.
You never know when your time will end (or the time of someone you love).
Take advantage of every day.
Don't put off for tomorrow what you could do today.
Make those memories now.
Don't let the day pass without telling those you love how you feel about them.
Forgive; life is too short to hold a grudge.
Live without regrets.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 6, 2012>
Last night, at our family dinner, friendship seemed to be the theme of all conversations with mom.
She had gone to church earlier in the day, which she had missed the past two weeks in a row (due to her "severe pains and fatigue") and was on cloud 9.
Mom was smiling and chatting a mile a minute all evening long about the many people who talked to her at church throughout the day.
As she enthusiastically recalled her visits with us, she kept playing with her hair, pulling on the ends and tucking it behind her ears.
She took occassional breaks from fidgeting with her hair to rub her hands together while she spoke; she does this frequently when she talks.
Maybe it's a nervous habit.
She always recounts her visits with my mother-in-law at church.
"Ginger is always so good to me too.
She's always real lovable and happy to see me too.
She's happy with me too and she's always good to me too."
Then onto an encounter with another long time family friend, "That one woman who we've known for many, many years...the one who looks so much like my sister...she was so happy to see me too.
She's so good to me when she sees me too, she's real happy with me.
And she was real happy when I sang her that song," she breaks into a quick song, "Jesus said love everyone, treat them kindly too...she was really happy and smiling when I sang her that song too."
"Sister Najarro too really loves me too.
She was real happy to see me too.
She's always so good to me too."
She talked about some other friends who complimented how nice she looked, or had other sweet words to say to her.
She couldn't remember the names of some of them.
But she was still beaming at the love that everyone had shown her throughout the day.
"I'm just glad that people still love me, even though I'm changing so much, but they're still real happy with me."
Sometimes, when dealing with a person with dementia, we might be apprehensive on approaching that person.
We may think "they probably don't remember me anyway, so what is the point?"
Maybe we don't know what to say, and as human nature would have it, we often times do not want to venture out of our comfort zone.
Maybe we don't want them to feel uncomfortable by watching their struggle to remember who we are.
But I am here to say that we can still have a positive effect on those around us who suffer from this terrible disease.
Maybe they don't remember us.
Maybe it does feel awkward and maybe we don't know exactly the right thing to say.
Even just a simple "hello" with a smile can mean the world to a person with dementia.
They need to know that they are loved, and not forgotten.
I truly believe that even if they cannot express this outwardly, deep down, inside this broken body, is that person that we all once knew and loved.
That person deep inside needs to be remembered and loved.
My heart is full of deep gratitude and love for those of you out there who continue to show friendship and love to my mom.
Know that your kind words and sweet smiles do make a difference, to my mom and to our family!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 3, 2012>
[This is a continuation of my blog written yesterday.
To read that post first, click here].
A couple of years ago, I realized how tired I had become of the age old question, "What's for dinner?"
It wasn't so much the kids that bothered me with this question, it was myself having to ask this question day in and day out that became tiresome.
I devised a solution to my problem: a dinner calendar.
Before baby #3 came along, I was did fairly well creating a one month dinner calendar and getting all of my grocery shopping done at the beginning of the month.
Nowadays, I am lucky to get two weeks planned out at a time.
However, it has helped a lot to plan these meals out in advance.
As I find new recipes that I want to try throughout the week or month, it's written on my calendar and I am able to formulate a grocery list much more easily and quickly.
With my mom's lack of dinner planning, I thought this system might be helpful for her.
When I first brought the idea up to her, she was not happy (to say the least).
"I don't like you guys picking me on me.
I would never treat my mother like this.
I would never do that."
I realized that she felt somewhat under attack, which was not my intention.
So I put my arms around her (which I think threw her off a little bit), and told her, "Mom I'm not trying to pick on you.
I'm trying to help you because I love you.
I know sometimes you have a hard time thinking of what to cook, so I thought this might be helpful for you.
I do it, too, and it helps me out a lot.
I'm just trying to help you."
She had no response to this, but she eventually settled down and followed the dinner calendar (but not before she called her sister to complain about how we were all picking on her).
So, at the beginning of each month, I sit down with mom and plan out a calendar for the month (or at least a week or two at a time).
From there, we make out a grocery list with the ingredients she will need for her meals and I usually take her shopping to find what is on her list.
We always leave Sundays open for family dinners, one day a week for leftovers and sometimes schedule them to come eat at my house.
We do a mixture of simple, frozen meals (such as frozen pizza with fresh fruit) and other home cooked meals.
It is repetitive...there are a lot of taco and pasta nights, but at least there is something on the calendar.
I try to help her plan out fresh fruits and veggies to eat as well, so it's more than just frozen mixed vegetables every night.
I admit, I've been slacking a little on the calendar this summer.
With five kids home all day long, and vacations and many day trips, I haven't been as dilligent in my or my mom's calendar.
The kids are back in school next week and I am ready to get back into my routine and get mom back on track with her calendar.
Some family members have asked about bringing meals in, just to help out.
At this point, the dinner calendar seems to be working.
I think it is beneficial to keep her doing her normal tasks for as long as possible.
There will come a time when the dinner calendar will no longer be effective.
At that time, we will come up with a Plan B.
But for now, this system seems to be working.
On a side note, if you like this system, you can get your own calendar white board from Amazon.
It is magnetic, can hang on your fridge, and can be changed out monthly.
There are several to choose from, but this is similar to the one I have:
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 2, 2012>
When I was growing up, my mom was a master in the kitchen.
We rarely ever ate out; mom had a nice meal on the table every night and we ate together as a family.
She acquired her cooking skills from my grandma, who was an amazing cook.
I can still remember staying at grandma's house, baking with her in the kitchen while she listened to Melinda Lee's cooking show on the radio.
As a kid, I thought she almost famous when she was featured (and spoke) on Melinda's cooking show.
I was proud when I saw her name, picture and recipes in newspapers and magazines, and impressed with her blue ribbon from the Orange County Fair for her original "Avocado Cream Pie".
All that to say, my mom learned from the best.
I was always proud to bring friends home and show off mom's home cooking.
I'm pretty sure that's why my husband kept coming back night after night while we were dating...he was a bachelor who loved a good home cooked meal.
Over the past few years, her cooking has become less and less.
At first, we thought it was just the "empty nest" phase-no kids at home to cook big meals for anymore.
But eventually, our Sunday family dinners (which are a big deal in our family) were becoming less thought out, and very repetitive.
We started joking around when Sundays would roll around, "What will it be tonight, spaghetti or tacos?"
Those became the only two things mom would cook.
Another big change was her motivation to cook.
Once passionate about cooking, she started losing interest.
Her taste for the foods she was once loved were becoming obsolete.
She used to always make the Sunday meals; over the past couple of years, mom has been doing less and less hosting of the Sunday meals, and my dad and I have become the coordinators and chefs of our family dinners.
One time, a few months before her diagnosis, we decided it was time to change things up.
We told her we wanted her to make her famous crockpot pot roast.
"Pot roast...what is pot roast?"
After a very detailed description of what pot roast is, where you buy it in the supermarket, and how you cook it, mom finally remembered.
The next night, at family dinner, we noticed she had put lima beans in the roast.
Somebody made a comment about the lima beans, "It's different, but I kinda like it," I believe was the comment.
"What are you talking about?
Are you talking about those green beans?
You told me to put in green beans," she replied defensively.
We didn't want to make her feel stupid, so we tried to explain nicely that what she used wasn't green beans, they were lima beans.
She was upset and insistent that they "are too" green beans.
She pulled the empty can of lima beans out of the trash can and showed them to us.
"See?
They are too green beans!"
As she took a closer look at the fine print, she saw the words "lima beans".
This upset her even more.
"What are green beans??
I'm so stupid.
I don't know why my brain won't work right!"
How had my mom, who once ruled the kitchen, come to this point, where she couldn't tell the difference between a lima bean and a green bean?
We tried to calm her down and reassure her that it was okay and that she hadn't ruined the meal.
"It's fine mom, they aren't green beans but they taste good!
It's okay...you're not stupid...it was just a mistake...they are green..." I felt so bad for her.
I felt sad that she thought she was stupid.
And I felt confused with what was happening to her, that she couldn't even distinguish differences in food anymore.
It was somewhere around this time, that I really began to realize that she was going to need more help in her meal planning and cooking.
It wasn't this incident alone, but a series of events that had led up to this conclusion.
A big part of this realization came from my dad.
It was frustrating for him to go to work all day long (he is a tilesetter, so he is literally "breaking his back" at work all day) and come home to an empty dinner table.
Although we knew something was "off" with my mom, we still hadn't gotten a diagnosis by this point and he was becoming increasingly frustrated with her lack of effort to prepare the meals, or do anything else for that matter.
Of course, by the time we had received a diagnosis, we began to realize that this was beyond her control and that she would definitely need some extra help in this task.
And....because I am a busy mom, and this is the last week of summer break for my kids...I am going to have to end my post here.
The kids are ready to go swimming!
Tune in tomorrow for part 2 of this post, which is our solution to the "what is for dinner?"
dilemma.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 31, 2012>
I've told you before and I'll tell you again, people with FTD develop an altered preference for food.
Foods they once loved become untasteful to them.
It is typical for them to want to eat the same foods day in and day out.
I have read over and over (in my online support group) that people with FTD will eat the same thing everyday.
For my mom, this is the case as well.
Her favorite meal is tortellini with LOTS of butter and garlic.
And I mean lots.
She uses butter and garlic on just about everything.
And we're not talking a dash of garlic...we're talking "would you like some vegetables with that garlic?"
The other night, mom and dad came over for dinner.
Mom brought her mixed vegetables and of course added a side of butter and garlic on top.
We were all chuckling at the amount she put on top as she told us how "delicious" it was, and urged us each to try it.
I couldn't resist taking a picture.
You can see what I mean when I say it's more than just a dash.
Some of her other favorite foods:  -chicken with BBQ sauce: it doesn't matter what kind of chicken we make, she wants BBQ sauce.
I made an Italian chicken with a tomato sauce the other night, and she brought out her BBQ sauce (much to all of our surprise, she actually tried it without the BBQ sauce and liked it).
-hamburgers -frozen burritos -frozen pizza -broccoli cauliflower salad -pineapple (this was a strange one to me...she never cared for pineapple when I was growing up) -costco rolls -milkshakes -Ensure and Slim Fast -tacos -chicken nuggets
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 28, 2012>
A couple miles away from UCLA is one of our church's temples.
My mom has always been religious and very active in our faith.
It has been magnified since her disease has been settling in.
Since we were all they way out in LA for the day, mom wanted to stop by the temple.
Why not?
It was something that would make her happy and you have to admit, the view is beautiful.
As we were walking through the visitor's center of the temple, my mom shared with me her feelings about her faith.
"I just definitely have so much faith in Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, too, and I have been praying to him a lot too, so much more lately.
I just talk to him, too, and hopefully he hears me.
But I definitely have faith in Him."
I can't help but to smile as she shares these things with me.
She has such an innocent, childlike faith.
Surely this is what Jesus meant when he told us that we ought to have the faith of a little child.
There is such a sweet innocence in my mom and in her pure love for and faith in her Savior.
Her faith strengthens my own.
I thought it would be nice to get a picture in front of this statue of Christ.
Before this picture was taken, mom had a huge grin on her face, looking upward, and her arms were in the air, pointing to Jesus as she declared,  "Jesus!
We love you!"
My dad told her to put her arms down for the picture.
But I almost wish we'd have gotten that shot to illustrate just how innocent and pure and childlike her love is.
After the picture, as we stood in front of the statue, mom began singing her favorite children's song, "Jesus said love everyone, Treat them kindly too.
When your heart is filled with love, Others will love you."
(On a side note, she also sang this to Jill during her appointment at UCLA because it had popped into her head).
I am so grateful for the faith that my mother has instilled in me since I was a small child.
It truly is what gets me through this, and all of, my trials in life.
It is hard losing my mom.
But I have faith that this will pass.
This life is but a small speck on the endless timeline of life.
Though the road ahead seems long and hard, I believe that we will be together again in the next life, where she will be free of pain and suffering.
She will be in a perfect state again, this time for eternity.
Without that knowledge, I don't know how I would get through the day.
I realize that not everybody reading this shares in the same faith as I do, and that's okay!!
I am not writing this to offend or to preach about my beliefs.
I am writing this to share what brings me peace and comfort through this difficult time, and to share something that is such an important part of my mom's life: her faith in the Lord.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 25, 2012>
When my mom was given the probable diagnosis in March, of semantic dementia, a hundred questions raced through my mind.
Of course I wasn't going to wait until a follow-up appointment to learn about her disease; I began reading everything I could find on FTD and semantic dementia.
Between March and now, she has had an MRI to confirm the diagnosis.
I suppose this visit was a follow up to discuss the results of the MRI (although they had already confirmed over email that the findings were consistent with semantic dementia).
Though I feel as if many of my questions have been answered over the past few months of research, I have still been anticipating this visit to UCLA.
I guess sometimes it helps to hear the answers straight from the horse's mouth.
I walked into the extremely cool, air-conditioned building of UCLA medical around 10:15 this morning.
My dad was parking the car (we were running a tad bit late...good ol' LA traffic); he dropped us off in the front to get mom checked in while he parked.
I don't know if it was the chilly air or my nerves, or maybe both, but my teeth would not stop chattering.
Why was I so nervous?
I knew what to expect, but coming face-to-face with reality was a bit overwhelming for me at that moment.
I saw an older, short woman with short grayish hair approach the waiting room, her eyes searching for someone.
I looked at her nametag that read "Jill" and knew she was looking for us (I've heard all about nurse-practitioner, Jill, since the last visit.
I felt like I knew her already!)
She finally recognized my mom and started to say hi just as I told her that we were the people she was searching for.
My mom gave her a blank look.
"Hi Deana, do you remember me?
I'm Jill, your nurse."
My mom looked at her with a blank expression on her face for several seconds.
She finally uttered an "oh yeah" as she began to remember her last visit.
"How was your drive?"
Jill asked my mom, remembering that the last drive out there had wreaked havoc in my mom's stomach, and consequently in the car and on her clothes.
Wrong question.
All mom heard was the word "drive".
"Driving?
Oh yeah, I was really so sad the last time I came out here and you guys cancelled my driving even though I'm really a good driver.
I was always a good driver, I don't know why you had to cancel me, I was really sad about that too..." She went on for a good minute or two and Jill just gave me the "uh-oh" look as she realized she had just opened a can of worms.
She tried to gently redirect her and change the subject.
She finally told us to have a seat and wait a few more minutes while she checked to see if the doctor was ready.
After a few minutes, we were called into the doctor's office with Jill, Dr. Mendez and another guy who wasn't introduced to us (I believe he was a neurology professor who was there for observation).
Dr. Mendez reviewed some things with us from the past visit and asked my mom some questions.
She had a difficult time understanding why she was there; she asked them to help her with her headache medicine and went on many tangents throughout the meeting about her driving situation.
Dr. Mendez pulled out a big book that contained pictures of objects.
The beginning pages were sketches of everyday items.
He asked her if he knew what the items were for and what they were called.
She identified that the sketch of the comb was for "combing hair", but couldn't name it as a comb.
He showed her a sketch of a toothbrush.
She stared hard at the picture and finally said, "Hmph.
It looks familiar" and then shook her head.
He showed her a picture of an octopus and asked her if she knew what it was.
She didn't know.
He showed her several more pictures of animals: a camel, a horse...I really can't remember what else because at some point I finally had to look away; my heart couldn't take it.
Tears welled in my eyes as I watched my mother struggle with each answer (every answer was either "I don't know" or "a dog").
I took a deep breath, looked at the door of the room and told myself that I would not break down in front of these people.
The next round of pictures was of celebrities: Ronald Reagan, Elizabeth Taylor, Marilyn Monroe, etc.
She could not recall who one of those people were.
My mom has always been a big classic movie fan.
I remember watching many movies with her which featured Elizabeth Taylor and Marilyn Monroe; she had no clue who they were.
She kept asking "How would I know these people?...
"are these people I know?"
and she would read the headline on the page: "famous people".
She finally looked up at the doctor very suspiciously and said, "This isn't you, is it?"
Then she glanced around the room, as if we were all tricking her.
"These aren't pictures of all of you people, is it?"
I have to admit we did get a few chuckles out of it, mom included.
We assured her that none of our pictures were in the book.
Dr. Mendez then showed us the results of the MRI.
He explained the findings in the brain and how they were consistent with semantic dementia.
In the picture of her brain was a dark circle.
He explained that it was a hole in her brain.
That part of her brain is disintegrating.
Basically, semantic dementia is caused by a protein called TDP 43.
This has only been discovered in 2006, so there is still a lot unknown in this particular form of dementia.
From what I can conclude, it seems that this protein eats away at the lobes in the brain.
There have been recent clinical trials of medicine to treat this disease; it was concluded as being ineffective.
There is no treatment at this time.
Based on the cognitive testing (and I'm guessing what he saw on the MRI), Dr. Mendez categorized her as "moderately advanced" in this process.
Now for the good news.
How can there be any good news in this???
What I really loved about Jill was that she wanted to focus on the positive.
There is so much negative, and news like this is devastating.
So she took time with us to point out the positives in our situation.
#1.
There is NO genetic link in semantic dementia.
What a huge sigh of relief I breathed today.
Most of the information I've read points to no genetic link, but there have been a couple things I've read that say there is a higher chance of carrying the gene for children of people with dementia.
Jill reassured me not to waste any time worrying that this will happen to me or my siblings, kids, etc.
Whew!
#2.
In my research, I've read over and over that the duration of this disease is generally 6-8 years.
She says the duration is longer with semantic dementia.
It is generally 12 years, but there is no definitive answer as it varies case by case.
It could be longer, or it could be shorter.
To be honest, I don't know if this is good news or not.
I don't want my mom to suffer.
For now I will view this as a positive because it means that we have more time left, to make memories, than I had originally anticipated.
#3.
Mom has a lot of obsessive behaviors.
It doesn't seem like a positive, I know.
But many dementia patients have safety issues (due to extremes in their behaviors), problems with hygeine, eating (weight loss), taking medicines, etc.
Because my mom is obsessed with taking her medicines on time, sleeping for certain lengths of time, showering and "decorating" her hair and make-up, this works for our and her benefit.
She does not have the problematic behaviors that so many others face.
#4.
Along with #3, the frontal parts of her lobes are not as damaged.
That part of the brain is the part that focuses on behaviors.
Though her behavior and personality has changed with this disease, it is not the same changes in behavior you will see when this part of the brain is damaged.
When or if the damage spreads to this part of the brain, we may see more mean and aggressive behavior, outbursts, etc.
#5.
She is still classifying things in categories.
For example, aside from the octopus, she still identified the animals as such.
Even though she thought most of the pictures were of dogs, she still recognized that they were animals.
She identifies food in the food category, even if she's not sure what the name of it is, and so on.
Out of all the forms of semantic dementia, this is the most rare.
Jill gave me some resources to find support for people with this specific disease, which I fully intend on utilizing.
They will follow up with us every 6 months, to check on her progression and help us in whatever difficulties we face.
After an hour and a half consulting with Jill and Dr. Mendez, we left UCLA.
Our questions are answered...for now...until we think of new ones to ask.
It wasn't all doom and gloom as I had expected.
Yet I still find myself emotionally exhausted, as I try to sort everything out in my mind.
Aside from my husband and my Aunt (who I'm very close to), I haven't talked about this with anybody.
In fact, I've kind of been avoiding talking about it.
I'm usually pretty open and don't mind talking.
Today, I just needed my space to take it all in and process it.
I find it easier to share through writing than by speaking.
I wanted to write while it was fresh in my mind.
And I needed to write for my own therapy today.
I'm sure there is a lot of information I've forgotten to write in, but it's all I can manage for now.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 23, 2012>
I was always a very sensitive child.
It didn't take much to hurt my feelings.
My mom used to always tell me that, one time, when I was a toddler, she said something that had upset me (I can't remember what it was) and in response I crossed my arms, looked up at her and with a pouty lip, exclaimed, "You huwt my feewings!"
[Interpretation: "You hurt my feelings."]
[I just had to throw this cute, little pouty face picture.
Because, let's face it, blogs are far more interesting when there are pictures].
When it came to any kind of reprimand, it was the same scenario.
I was the kind of kid who cried anytime she got into trouble.
A spanking would absolutely devastate me.
If someone called me a name or said something unkind, it was hard to hold back the tears.
Likewise, when I was reprimanded, it hurt my feelings as well.
One of my parent's favorite stories, which my mom documented in her journal, was about a time when I was having some sort of disagreement with one of my siblings.
My mom told me that I was being selfish, and through my hurt and emotional distress, I yelled, "I'm not selfish!
I'm sharing my temper with you!"
As I blossomed into a teenage girl, my sensitivity only magnified.
My parents used to joke that if you even looked at me the wrong way, I would cry.
I think that is a rather dramatic statement; I wasn't that bad.
But I did have a tendency to wear my feelings on my sleeve, and they got hurt very easily.
Life experiences have toughened me up, so to speak.
Though I am still somewhat on the sensitive side, I no longer cry at the drop of a dime.
In fact, I've almost gone the opposite direction.
I rarely ever cry these days.
I don't know if it's necessarily a good thing, but I usually suppress all of my unpleasant feelings inside, until I can no longer hold it in anymore.
I would say once every month or two, I end up having some sort of meltdown, where all the emotions that I've bottled up finally explode.
People ask me frequently, "How are you doing [emotionally] with your mom's situation?"
My younger self would be a mess.
Thank goodness for those life experiences and the tougher skin it has grown me!
It is definitely an emotional roller coaster.
There are times when I feel very strong and put together, and other times when I feel overwhelmed at the curve ball we've been thrown.
This past week has been another drop on the rollercoaster for me.
As I look through old pictures, and remember my mom the way she was, I feel sad at our loss.
I miss my mom.
Even though she is still here with us (and I am grateful for that) I really miss my mom for the way she was.
I miss having my confidant.
I miss having someone to give me parenting advice when I need it-or any advice, for that matter.
I miss having my friend to shop with.
I am grateful for the friends and family members who have stepped in to try and fill those gaps for me; nobody can take the place of mom.
My mom has been very tired over this past week, and having more "severe" pains due to her "degenerative disk, narrowing spine" disorder that the doctor claims she has.
It seems like every day that I have seen my mom this past week, she has made comments about dying young.
"I've just been feeling so severe lately.
I sure hope I'm not going to die young.
That would be so sad.
I just hope I get to live a long life, too, and not die young."
As she was leaving my house the other night, she stood up from the couch, wobbling a little and commenting on how "weird" it is that when she gets up she is a little unstable.
I guess the "severity" of her wobbling made her think again about a young death.
This time, as my dad held her arm while they walked out the door, she added a few lines to her dialogue for him, "I sure hope I don't die young.
That would be so sad.
And then you would marry someone else and I don't want you to marry anybody else.
That would be so sad.
I would be so sad.
But you could be like your grandma, she never got married again when your grandpa died when she was still so young.
She never got married all those years, she was by herself and she was okay."
She has such a childlike innocence in her voice when she speaks.
She has no idea about her disease (though we've tried explaining that she has dementia, she doesn't comprehend what that means).
She has no idea that her life will be cut short.
It breaks my heart to hear her express her anxieties about dying young.
What do you say in response to those comments?
Most of the time I try to redirect the conversation and I don't go back to reflect on what she is saying.
Lately, because it has been brought up in at least one conversation per visit with her, it's becoming harder to ignore.
I can sense a breakdown coming on.
If I just stay busy, and don't think about or dwell on it, I am okay.
It is in those quiet moments, when I am alone with my thoughts, that my sensitive, emotional side returns.
I suppose that is partially why I have become so proactive in all of this.
It helps to occupy my mind and my time doing something positive, rather than dwell on the negative.
One thing I know for sure, I am learning to appreciate life and the time we have left with her.
Live life to the fullest.
Never pass up a moment to tell someone you love them.
Do not hold onto grudges, time is too short.
Never put off for tomorrow what you can say or do today.
Live your life with no regrets.
I wish we had learned of her diagnosis earlier on, because I feel like a lot has been wasted.
All we can do is move forward and make the best of what is happening now.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 21, 2012>
Since I've learned of my mom's diagnosis, I've been searching for ways to become involved in the dementia community and help in some way.
I've thought of forming some kind of walk for dementia, but have no idea how to go about doing that.
The Alzheimer's Association is the organization that deals with dementia.
Though it's mostly focused on Alzheimer's, it covers dementia as a whole.
I have yet to find an organization specific to FTD.
I suppose that is because it is such a small percentage affected in the dementia community; Alzheimer's represents 50-60% of ALL dementias.
In response to a comment I left (on the Alzheimer's website), I received information about a walk that will be happening in the city next to mine, on October 13th.
I am very excited to announce that I will be participating in my first walk!!
And...I am forming a team, which means I am a team captain!
I have named my team in honor of my mom, "Team Dee".
Our team goal is to raise $1,200.
However...for those who know me, you know that I love a little healthy competition.
I am determined to be one of the top fund raising teams!
Please, please, pretty please donate for our cause, which is very near and dear to my heart.
It takes only a minute to do.
You can drop a check in the mail, hand it to me personally (for those who are local), or go directly online and make your donation.
Even if $5 is all you are able to contribute...it does help!
If every friend and family member that I knew donated $5, I could potentially raise thousands of dollars!
(On a side note...it is a tax write-off!)
Millions are affected by Alzheimer's, even more affected by other forms of dementia.
Those numbers are expected to double every 20 years.
It is the leading cause of death in the elderly.
Today, we can all make a stand against the fight on dementia!
I walk for all those affected by this terrible disease; but most of all, I walk for my mom.
Go Team Dee!
Click here to donate to my team!
!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 18, 2012>
"What does your mom do all day?"
This is a common question that I am asked whenever family or friends learn of my mom's condition (and her leave from work).
Many patients with FTD develop a set routine for their day.
Mom is no exception.
Here is a basic run-down of her day.
It begins at 8:00 am.
Don't try to get her out of bed before then; it won't happen unless it's a Sunday morning when she has church at 9:00 am.
Sometimes she might sleep in a little longer, but her typical get-out-bed time is 8:00.
If she's awake at 7:00, get-out-of-bed time is still 8:00.
I'll spare you all the gorey details, but suffice it to say, she takes care of her bathroom situations first and by 8:30 on the dot, she is ready to take round 1 of her medications.
Following that, she will drink her Slim-Fast for breakfast.
She stirs it exactly 100 times to make sure it is mixed well.
After breakfast she takes a shower and then blow-dries her hair and applies her make-up, even if her plans for the day are simply to stay home.
For many dementia patients, poor hygeine and grooming habits become an issue.
For some reason, this hasn't happened yet with my mom (thank goodness!).
I suspect it is because FTD patients also develop obsessive behaviors; my mom is obsessive about her appearance.
She's always been very self-conscious, due to her fair skin and red hair.
Her vanity has been taken to new heights with this disease.
She will not step even a big toe on the front porch without her hair and make-up done.
No exaggeration.
Her daily routine mainly revolves around food, sleep and medication.
I mentioned that she takes her medicine and eats breakfast at 8:30 am.
12:00 pm is lunch time.
At 1:30 pm, she takes a nap until it's time for medication again at 2:30 pm.
That leaves the afternoon free until dinner time (if she cooks anything...another blog for another day) which is at 5:30 pm.
8:30 pm is her last round of medications.
She will take her meds and then spend the next half hour getting ready for bed.
Bedtime is at exactly 9:00 pm.
I know it might sound a little rigid; there is little flexibility in her routine.
This is why vacationing and going out places have become increasingly difficult.
From what I've read, these OCD behaviors will begin to dwindle and eventually become non-existent as the disease progresses to the severe stage.
There isn't a whole lot that she does throughout the day.
Once a meticulous house cleaner, she now sees beyond the mess around her and cannot function in daily and weekly chore routines that she once had.
She will do loads of laundry here and there.
Occassionally she will stroll into the kitchen and do a few dishes.
Every once in a while, she might clean the inside of a toilet bowl.
And very occasionally she might vacuum (although there have been some issues with the vacuum...again, another post for another day).
This is the extent of her housecleaning.
She usually works in 15-20 minute increments.
Anything more than that makes her sweaty and tired and she takes a rest on the couch.
Much of her time is spent on the couch; she has her favorite spot that nobody else is allowed to take.
I've gone over many times to find her sitting on the couch, arms folded across her chest, her eyes staring straight ahead.
Maybe she is lost in thought, I'm not exactly sure.
There is no TV on (she can't follow a plot line); she just sits and stares.
This picture was obviously not taken on the couch, but it depicts what I just described to you.
Sometimes she will be listening to music.
She loves oldies and "The Mormon Tabernacle Choir".
More often than she sits and stares, mom plays games.
She loves card games on the computer as well as crossword puzzle games-not the kind where they give you clues and  you fill in the words.
But the kind where you have the word already and you fill in the space.
Like these:  She will spend hours in front of the computer playing games (spider solitaire is her favorite), or on the couch filling out puzzles.
It sounds odd that she would be able to do these things, given her condition, but it is actually characteristic of the disease.
I've heard others make the same claim about their loved ones who also suffer from FTD.
At this point, mom is okay to stay by herself throughout the day without supervision.
Eventually that will change.
My sister and I both live within a couple miles of our parent's house.
There isn't a day that goes by that one or both of us don't stop by for some reason or another.
Even when we are there, however, mom still follows her routine.
She seeks no entertainment from us.
Sometimes she will converse with us, sometimes she will silently play her games.
There are days where she gets out of the house.
She has doctor's appointments at least a couple of times a month.
She loves to go to Sam's Club with my Aunt, usually once a month.
She gets out, either with my dad or me, to go grocery shopping or to run other errands.
And of course we have family gatherings and outings that she attends (most of the time).
Even when she gets out, there are still the 3 criteria that must be considered: food, sleep, and medication.
But in a nutshell, this is how my mom fills her days.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 16, 2012>
Just an fyi, for those who don't already know, you can now follow me on facebook as well.
The link below will take you there: https://www.facebook.com/journeywithdementia This is just another way to keep you all connected with this journey, and to update you when I publish new posts.
Spread the word!
:)
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 16, 2012>
Being a mom to 3 young kids means being creative (and somewhat flexible) with meals.
I expose my children to a variety of foods and encourage trying new things.
I do not cater to their whims when they are opposed to the meals I make.
With that said, I have one child, in particular, who is especially picky.
Though she eventually eats what is on her plate, if it's something she doesn't want to eat, she will let you know about it.
If I stick to her "staple" meals (the foods that she is guaranteed to eat...pizza, hamburgers, chicken nuggets, etc), we will have no issue.
But whenever I try something new, I'm prepared for the fits; "what is that?
", "I don't like that", etc.
I have to remind them when we go out to have good manners and be polite about the food, especially if we are eating at another person's house.
Thankfully, every restaurant has a kid's meal.
If there are hamburgers, chicken nuggets, or macaroni and cheese, I know I'm safe when we're eating out.
Mealtime with kids can be exhausting, and even  annoying!!
One of the symptoms of frontotemporal lobe dementia is an altered food preferences.
This means that the person will lose their taste for things they once loved, or become overly obsessed with particular foods.
Over the past couple years, my mom's food preferences have drastically been altered.
Foods that she once loved have lost their place on her taste buds.
In fact, like my children, there are only a few types foods that she prefers to eat.
She loves chicken and chicken nuggets.
She really loves hamburgers and milkshakes.
Her absolute favorite meal is tortellini with alfredo sauce and LOTS of garlic, frozen mixed vegetables on the side.
My Aunt gave her a recipe for a broccoli cauliflower salad.
She will make that salad every week and eat it for lunch.
Every time she does, she tells us about how delicious it is and how grateful she is that Tia Tina gave her this delicious recipe.
She likes tacos, pizza and burritos.
She drinks a slim fast every morning for breakfast (stirring it exactly 100 times) and drinks Ensure frequently.
"It's so delicious" is her catch phrase on meals that she really enjoys.
Sometimes she will even sing the preschool song "Yummy yummy yummy in my tummy tummy tummy".
It doesn't matter if we are at home or out in public at a restaurant; when she's excited about her food, she will break out into song.
She has been known to offend people when acting picky about the food they've prepared for her when she's visited their home.
She's even gone so far as to reject their food and go to Jack-in-the-Box instead!
When I say she's offended people, this is before her diagnosis.
We now have an understanding that this is beyond her control, and we don't take offense when she brings her own meals to our houses for family dinners.
We anticipate beforehand that she may not always like/eat what we prepare.
When it comes to eating out, she has become more difficult than the kids.
When given a choice of where to eat she will always choose from the same places: Miguel's Jr (a local fast-food Mexican place that we have been eating at our entire lives), Outback Steakhouse, or Jack-in-the-Box.
When we are completely sick of those 3 places, or when those aren't an option, we know that if we find a place that has hamburgers and milkshakes, we will be okay.
The picture you see was taken over the weekend at Miguels.
When I call to invite her to go to Miguels, she becomes giddy like a schoolgirl.
"Oh YES!
Thank you so much.
I just love Miguels so much, thank you!
Their food is so delicious too!"
(She will usually then give me the run-down on her favorite burrito, and ask me if I've ever tried it, the "Miguel's Garbage Burrito").
Writing this doesn't capture the enthusiasm and excitement in her voice.
It sounds like a kid who just opened a gift that they'd been anticipating for some time.
I've learned to just smile at the childlike innocence and wonder in her voice.
This symptom of the disease can be very problematic for many dementia patients.
Fortunately for us, mom loves her ensure, frozen vegetables and salads.
But many people with dementia lose their desire for healthy foods and instead become obsessed with junk food.
Oddly enough, my once chocolate-loving, queen-of-baking mother has lost her taste for sweets.
She never eats sweets or desserts anymore.
For those who are reading this, and are struggling with keeping your loved-one healthy (whether it's a picky child or a person with an illness), I have a few suggestions.
1.
Give them ensure to drink-it is packed with vitamins that will give them some nutrition.
2.
Learn to cook with purees.
I started doing this with my family.
It's super easy to hide vegetable and fruit purees in simple meals that you make.
I learned how to do when I purchased this cookbook.
It was worth every penny!
3.
You can crush vitamins (if they are resistant to taking them) and hide them in foods, shakes, etc.
Or better yet, get liquid or powder vitamins and/or supplements to hide in their food.
4.There is a cookbook that was written specifically for people with problems chewing and swallowing (which eventually develops in dementia patients).
There are some yummy and healthy recipes.
Dealing with picky eaters can be a real challenge.
In all honesty, it is easier to coax my kids to eat what is put before them than it is with a dementia patient.
But with the right tools and knowledge, the fight can become a little easier!
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, July 13, 2012>
This is where I was last week; vacationing with my family in the Bahamas.
Isn't it gorgeous?
I know, it's a rough life.
While basking away in the sun, on the lush white sands of Cable Beach, I thought a lot about my mom.
About 4 or 5 years ago, she took her first trip to the Bahamas on a cruise.
I remember her excitement when she returned home, sharing photos, souvenirs and stories of the beautiful isles.
She told me how much I would love it there (seeing how I'm a beach kind of gal) and talked about "one day" when we could all go together.
My mom loved to vacation.
Growing up, my parents were pretty good about taking us on some sort of vacation every year.
She loved visiting new places; we all did.
As my siblings and I grew up and flew the coop, mom and dad started traveling more.
My mom had a list of places she wanted to visit.
My dream is to someday go to Italy; we talked about the prospect of someday doing a big vacation together to Europe and Italy.
Mom still talks about vacationing a lot, but her vision has narrowed.
She doesn't talk about new and exciting places she wants to visit.
Instead,she talks about only a few places that she has visited already.
She talks about visiting her distant Aunts and Uncles in Utah, about going back East to Connecticut (where my dad spent his childhood) and especially about taking "church history" vacations.
One of my mom's obsessions right now is religion (another is the past...she could talk to you about her childhood all day).
She talks about religion, and her Mormon pioneer ancestors, to anyone and everyone.
Lately, she's been talking to me a lot about how fun it would be to repeat a vacation her and my dad took a few years ago to Nauvoo (a historical place in our church's history).
On several occassions, she has made a point to talk to me about this, "I just wanted to ask you if you would ever want to go sometime to Nauvoo to take a vacation?
It would be so fun to all go together."
And then she recounts the things she did while on her first trip there.
It would be great to do a vacation there someday.
But the time is ticking.
We all realize, at this point, that it's only a matter of time before traveling is impossible with her.
Our last trip, Easter weekend, was difficult.
As each day goes by, the dream of her vacation begins to wither away.
This has been a sad reality for me.
I've always enjoyed taking the kids on vacations and trips with my parents.
My youngest kids are too young to even remember.
I know traveling with mom is rough, but I would really like to plan just one last trip with all of her kids and grandkids, to make her dreams come true.
I haven't brought this idea to light with my dad or siblings; I'm a little hesitant to because of our past experience.
But maybe they will feel inspired as they read this.
With the holidays just right around the corner, I think one of the best gifts we could give mom would be to take her on a family trip.
Though her memory of it will soon be gone, it will live in ours forever. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 9, 2012>
A couple of posts ago, I mentioned a book that I had read which has helped me tremendously on this journey.
I would like to share that book with my readers.
If you have a loved one who is suffering from dementia, I highly recommend you reading this book.
You can order it through Amazon by clicking on the link below (sorry, there is no web version available as of yet):       This book takes you through the journey of dementia (by sharing one woman's story of caring for her husband) and provides resources for the different issues you will inevitably face with this disease.
I admit, there are parts of this book that are hard to read.
It's difficult to read about what is to come.
However, I feel that it is necessary to know what to expect so that I can prepare myself mentally, physically and emotionally.
I need to be a strength to my mom and to my family; this book has helped me to gain a realistic perspective and prep for the future.
Susan shares her story in simple terms; it is an easy read.
I started reading this book on a Friday night and finished by late Saturday afternoon.
I cannot say enough good things about this book.
In my opinion, it is a MUST read for any and all who are affected by this terrible illness.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 23, 2012>
When I was a kid, my mom bought me a bookmark with my name on it.
It read: "Cassandra: helper of mankind."
I remember her beaming and telling me how perfectly my name definition fit me.
I was always my mom's helper.
When she had an important job that needed to get done, she knew that she could ask me and I'd be there to help her out.
Whether it was grocery shopping with her, baking all the Christmas goodies, running errands (once I had my license)...mom knew she could count on me.
I remember her always telling me that I was an "altruistic" person.
At the time, I had no idea what that big word meant.
Now that I am older, and somewhat wiser, I know what it means to have altruism.
I don't know if I truly fit that description, but I do know that I care deeply about other people.
My dad has always been an amazing example of helping and serving others; I try to model myself after him.
I love the feeling I have when I help another person.
When I see people troubled with different issues, I like to try and be the friend that can help them solve their problems.
Since my mom's diagnosis, I've been racking my brain trying to figure out how I can help to make this situation better.
Nothing I can do will make this disease go away; in that sense I am completely helpless.
Yet there's been this nagging feeling that there is something for me to do, some role that I can and must play in all of this.
There will come a time when she will need round-the-clock care.
I want to be there to help with that.
Realistically, I have my own home and 5 children to take care of.
How can I take on the role of caring for my mom without neglecting my family?
I worry about the financial toll all of this will take on my dad.
Not that he's a pauper...but in-home care is vey costly.
What can a small person like me do to help in such a giant situation?
And then it came to me.
I can blog.
Initially, I started this blog as a means of therapy for myself.
I then opened up by sharing it with those family members and friends who are closest to me, to keep them up-to-date on mom's condition.
Recently, I decided it was time to share it with anyone who was interested in reading; friends from church who have interacted with mom (and wondered about her strange behavior and memory loss), others who are dealing with the same heartache.
More recently, I have expanded my thinking and seen a bigger picture.
Something much bigger than myself, much bigger than just posting an update on my mom every few weeks .
This vision started with a mere suggestion of a friend (my sister's friend, to be exact).
After reading my blog, she told my sister that I am "a brilliant writer" and suggested to her that people are able to get paid for their blogging.
That's when the wheels in my head started turning.
I don't know that I'm a "brilliant" writer.
But what if I could transform my blog into something more?
What if I could make this little blog of mine into a place where people can turn for answers?
A place where people can read and learn about the journey of dementia through my experiences.
A place where they can turn for support and additional resources to aid them in their own journey.
And all the while, as I am able to (hopefully) help others in their journey, I can earn a little money to help fund the cost of my mom's care.
I've seen the vision.
I'm excited.
I'm nervous.
I'm eager.
I'm afraid of failure.
But I have the chance to do something.
Over the next few weeks, my blog will be under construction as I try to bring this vision to life.
Please be patient with me as I work out all the kinks.
When the time comes, and I'm ready to move forward with this next step in our journey, I would love it if you all moved forward with me.
Follow my blog.
Tell your friends, tell your family.
Tell others who are struggling with this same hardship.
I need a large following to begin the next step of this process.
Leave your feedback.
I want to hear from you.
There comes a time, in each of our lives, where things become hard.
Sometimes the challenges we face become unbearable.
We can choose to dwell on the negative, or we can try to make a positive out of the trials we face.
Losing my mom is hard.
In fact, it is the biggest challenge I've had to face.
I feel determined to do something positive.
For my mom, I will try to live up to my name.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 18, 2012>
Raising a toddler is a demanding job.
Having three small children (my youngest being 14 months old) often leaves me drained, physically and emotionally.
Having children means putting their needs ahead of your own, but having a toddler means constant care and attention.
From the minute my toddler wakes up in the morning, until the time he goes to bed at night, my day is centered around his routine and his needs.
He doesn't yet talk, so he communicates to me with a mixture of babble, cries, whines, laughs and giggles, tantrums, and so on.
He can't do much for himself; I spend my days dressing him, changing his diapers, bathing, preparing his food, wiping up messes, entertaining him and keeping him safe.
His new favorite thing to do it is climb.
I have to keep a watchful eye on him to make sure that he doesn't fall off the kitchen table or the playground outside.
He's learning to walk but isn't as steady on his feet, so he gets a lot of bumps and bruises when he's navigating himself to where he wants to go.
My house has been altered for my toddler.
Childlocks secure every cupboard because without them he is pulling everything out and breaking dishes on the floor.
We have to keep the doors closed-especially the bathroom door as he has a fascination with the toilet.
Sharp and dangerous objects must be kept out of his reach.
We have to be careful of the things that are left out in his view because anything small will make it into his mouth if he finds it.
Sometimes, things go missing (the TV remote being the most popular) and we play a big guessing game trying to figure out what he has done with it.
If we try to ask him what he did with the missing object, he might giggle, he might babble or just give us blank looks because he doesn't know what the heck we're talking about.
When it comes to outings, they revolve around his nap schedule.
He takes a morning nap and a later afternoon nap.
Grocery shopping, errands, trips to the library, etc are worked around his sleeping schedule.
Staying out late isn't an option because he has an early bedtime.
When he doesn't get his sleep, he is cranky, whiney and has many meltdowns.
He sleeps in a crib; if he weren't confined he would wake up and wander around the house and cause all kinds of trouble!
Of course if my husband and I want a night out, we must hire a babysitter to take care of him while we are gone.
Toddlers can't be left alone.
Last week at support group, a book was recommended to me to read on behaviors of people with dementia.
As I was researching that book (on Amazon), I stumbled upon another book called "Dementia: The Journey Ahead".
It is a guide for caregivers of dementia patients, written by a woman who cared for her husband (who had Semantic Dementia).
I ordered both books, opting for the 2 day shipping.
I was anxious to read.
The book arrived Friday afternoon and I had finished reading it by Saturday night.
The conclusion I drew after reading the book is that my mom is becoming an adult sized toddler.
It was hard to read about what is to come; necessary, but hard.
I have had so many questions about what this disease will look like as it progresses.
As it is now, my mom has very childlike behaviors.
As the disease progresses, it will become more and more childlike.
It is almost as if she is growing backwards and will eventually become like an infant again.
The only difference is that unlike a child (or a baby), her body is forgetting how to function, rather than learning.
Susan, the author of the book, prepared caregivers for what is to come by sharing experiences of her husband as well as by giving recommendations of where to turn for help on each given situation.
In a nutshell, here are some major changes that we can expect in the future with mom: We can expect her to lose memory of everyone around her.
I was holding onto the hope that she'd remember those who were closest to her.
And it's still a possibility.
But we have to prepare for the worst.
We can expect that mom may become incontinent.
This means that she will be in diapers.
Again, I've heard that most dementia patients become this way but I was hoping there was a chance to skip that.
It looks very unlikely that we will escape the inevitable.
We can expect to childproof the house.
Many dementia patients put small things in their mouths and eat whatever is in sight.
It's hard to believe that this could happen to my dear mom, but it's something I hear over and over from other caregivers.
Dementia patients become wanderers.
We will have to keep tabs on her and make sure that doors are secured so she can't wander outside.
We can expect temper tantrums, whining and crying and even take some beatings.
Imagine a toddler tantrum but in an adult body.
This is typical in dementia.
Eventually, but not necessarily, she could become bed ridden.
Each case is individual, so there's no telling one way or the other.
But many become this way and end up in hospital beds.
They sleep for many hours of the day, like newborn babies.
Like I said, each person is different and no two cases are exact.
However, this is the "norm" in dementia.
From my reading, each case of dementia starts out different (depending on the form of dementia they have), but in the end most cases look alike.
Bottom line: mom is going to need round the clock care in the near future.
At the end of the book, there was a rating scale to determine which phase your loved one is in.
There were several categories of behaviors and cognitive abilities to rate and the ratings were as follows: 0: none .5: questionable 1: mild 2: moderate 3: severe In most categories, she scored a 1 or 2 (mild or moderate) which I interpret to mean that she fits the moderate category (or is at least transitioning into it).
Now is the time to prepare for the next phase: severe.
I don't know how we are going to get through this.
I know we will, but I don't know how.
Susan was fortunate enough to be able to quit her job to care for her husband full-time.
And even then she had another part-time caregiver come in to assist her.
There are facilities that house people (my dad would never send family to a home), there are daycare and in-home care options; all are very expensive.
With my dad being self-employed, he doesn't have a steady income.
It isn't feasible for him to quit work to take care of her full-time, as the bills still need to be paid.
They are too young for retirement or Medi-care.
Our best option is waiting to see what Social Security will offer her to financially relieve them of some of this burden.
The current wait time on their case is 12-18 months.
My dad would say this isn't for me to stress about.
Yet the past few nights I have laid awake in bed feeling stressed about the future.
I am stressed for my dad and what he is going through, and especially for what is to come.
He can't do this alone.
I have 5 kids ranging from 1 year to 16 years old; it is impossible for me to care for my mom everyday and manage my family and household at the same time.
But I do know that I need to do something to help my dad (and my mom) get through this.
I want to be there to help.
Once again, I find myself trying to figure out my role in this difficult journey.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 13, 2012>
A couple of months ago, my best friend (of 23 years) and I reconnected on the phone.
Although we had been keeping in touch through email and facebook, it had been quite a while since we had talked on the phone.
We arranged a time beforehand to make sure that we wouldn't have interruptions and could "catch up" with one another.
We both anticipated the call and thought about everything we would fill each other in on, which was quite a bit!
It was a bit overwhelming to think of where to begin and cram in all the bits of informaion we wanted to share in a limited space of time.
In a period of four hours, we tried to catch one another up to speed on the happenings of our current lives.
Four hours sounds like a long time to talk on the phone, but when it was time to say good-bye, we both felt like we still had so much more to say!
I suppose that's what happens when you don't communicate for a long time.
Before we hung up, we promised each other to have phone calls weekly; that way we are better able to keep up on everything we want to share with one another.
It's been almost two months since I've last blogged.
As with the anticipated phone call with my friend, I feel overwhelmed on where to start.
So many thoughts and events have transpired in the past couple of months.
I could sit here for hours and recount everything that has taken place: her trip to Montana to visit her brother, our family camping trip in the mountains, the updates on her driving and the progression of her disease.
Mother's Day.
Her birthday.
But where do I begin?
How can I possibly convey all the happenings and all of the emotions that have taken place over the course of the past couple of months in just one simple entry?
Rather than try and eat a whole elephant, I will simply have to snack on small pieces.
Perhaps over time I can go back and try to finish the whole thing, but for now I will just take small bites and share what is in the forefront of my mind.
One of the most significant things that has occured since my last entry is that I have joined a caregivers support group.
I found a group that meets a mile down the road, at a facility that houses people with dementia.
It meets the 2nd and 4th Mondays of the month.
The first meeting I went to (last month) was very intimidating.
I tried to get my dad and my sister to go with me; both were unable to attend.
I hestitantly walked into the room, butterflies in my stomach, not quite sure what to expect.
I knew it was a longshot, but deep down I was hoping to find someone there who had a loved one with the same form of dementia as my mom, someone who could relate to what I was saying and share some of their experiences with me.
There is still so much that is unknown, and I suppose I fear the unknown.
I want to know what to expect in the future.
It has been hard to find much on Semantic Dementia when I research it (every place refers back to the same few links).
Meeting someone with Semantic Dementia would be almost a relief for me, to know we're not alone and to prep for what's to come.
Well, it was a long shot.
There were three other caregivers who came to the group that morning, along with the director.
When I said the words "semantic dementia" I was questioned on exactly what that is.
Even the director, whose mother had Alzheimer's and who has been involved in support groups for years (and whose husband is a neuropsychologist), was unfamiliar with the term (once I told her the nickname was "Picks Disease", however, she began to recall what she knew about the disease).
I came to the group hoping for some sort of answers; instead, I was educating everyone else on this rare form of dementia.
I will be honest, I felt a little discouraged in that moment.
The director's unfamiliarity with it just affirmed to me exactly how uncommon this is.
I realized that I had gone there searching for answers on her disease, and answers is not what I would be receiving from this group.
But as we talked, what I began to realize was that I had found a group of people who understand the hardship my family is facing.
Though the form of dementia is different, there are many similarities in every person who has some form of it.
I could relate to the things that they were sharing about their loved one, as they could with me.
I felt an empathy from them that I haven't found with other people who I talk with about my mom.
They understand exactly what I am feeling: the frustrations, the heartache, the loss.
Because they are feeling it too.
That morning, I found four other allies who could relate to everything I have am going through.
I am not alone; my family is not alone.
Another thing I found with this support group was resources to help us in this process.
They were able to give me good advice on obtaining Power of Attorney (and cautioned me to avoid Conservatorship at all costs-which was the route we had been thinking of taking).
They told me exactly what my dad needed to do to obtain the Power of Attorney.
We talked about daycare options versus homecare options versus assisted living care option.
They gave me some additional resources and phone numbers to call for more information on the topic.
Although I didn't receive answers on the disease itself, I found solutions to other care questions that I have been thinking about in the back of my mind.
Some aren't relevant at the present moment, but I feel a little more sure about the future knowing that I now have a network of experienced people who can point me in the right direction when I need help on a particular situation.
This week, I attended my second support group meeting.
This time, both my dad and my sister came with me.
Our take-aways are different: my sister and I find it helpful to talk with others who are going through similar struggles.
My dad, however, does not see the purpose or feel the need to talk about it with people.
He has never been one to "wear his feelings on his sleeve".
He grew up in a home where men were men-they don't cry and they don't show emotion.
They don't express what they are feeling either.
So for him, it is probably uncomfortable to put himself out there and talk about something so deep and personal (in a more emotional setting).
While he particpated and vented his frustrations with the disease and with the doctors and all that we've been through over the past few years, he walked away questioning what he had gained from going.
He was given the extra push to get the Power of Attorney done "today" (which was a great take-away in and of itself!)
and was encouraged to find some thing and some time for himself.
I do think there was some positive feedback and helpful advice for him, but I think he figures they are only telling him things that he already knows.
I hope that he will give it another chance in the future and see what he can gain from going.
I suppose, at the end of the day, we each deal with our grief in different ways.
I am taking each day step-by-step, as I try to figure out my role in all of this.
I know that I need to be a support for my dad, as well as my mom.
I've come to the mind that I need to find the light in the darkness I face.
Nothing will ever make this (mom's disease) a good thing.
But I am determined to make some goodness out of the adversity.
Whether it is building my patience or learning to serve or love unconditionally, or becoming a support for someone else, there is something that I can learn from all of this.
I try each day to focus on what I can learn and how I can grow, rather than focus on what I have lost.
My mom spent her life teaching me valuable life lessons on how to be the best person I can possibly be.
She always told me that when we are faced with obstacles, we need to learn from them and "rise above it".
Sometimes it is hard.
There are days where I feel frustrated and where I feel downright depressed.
But I can't let her down.
Now is the time to learn and rise above the obstacle, and hopefully come out a stronger, better person in the end.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, April 27, 2012>
I've been in a "funk" the past week or so.
I knew this was going to be an emotional roller coaster.
I was feeling really strong for a while; but for the past week I have been feeling really down.
Nothing has really changed over the course of the week, but I've been noticing a change in my dad.
He is a self-employed contractor.
Despite our horrible economy, he's been doing fairly well for himself.
The past few weeks, however, he hasn't had any work.
He has been home everyday with my mom.
Normally it wouldn't be such a terrible thing; and it's not that being with her is terrible.
But it is difficult, and it can be depressing.
Between the stress of not working and the stress of my mom (and finally slowing down enough to metally process her condition), my dad has seemed very depressed.
My dad is my hero; he is the rock of our family.
He is a go-getter and an optimist.
He is not the kind of guy to show too many emotions; his attitude, when life gets hard, is a "suck it up" and "deal with it" kind of attitude.
He never feels sorry for himself and he doesn't let a whole lot get to him.
He is also one of the most giving people I know.
You've heard of those kinds of people who would "give you the shirt off their back" if you needed it.
My dad would give you the shirt off his back and then go and buy you a dozen more.
I have met very few people who are as generous and give so freely of their time and talents as my dad.
When my grandfather (my mom's stepdad) was dying of Lou Gehrig's disease and needed round the clock care, my dad became his primary caregiver.
He made time to work and still be there every single day to care for my grandpa.
As tiring and as daunting a task that was, he never complained.
Not once.
It's been difficult to see this change in my dad over the last few weeks.
I know it's not mom's health alone, but it is a big contributing factor.
I can see that he is lonely.
My mom is there physically, but mentally she's pretty far out there.
She makes the same conversations day after day; talking about what a good driver she is, about this pain and that ache, about this medicine and that medicine, about her doctors, her upcoming visits, money...it's exhausting.
Conversations with her consist of her sharing what is on her mind, the other person responding, and mom acting as if she never heard a word.
Sometimes she will give blank looks, other times she will jump back into talking about the next thing she is thinking about.
Occassionally, she will hear tidbits of what we say and that is after saying it repeatedly before it registers.
Even then, she most often interprets things differently in her mind and hears something different than what we actually said.
For example, my twin brother and his family are coming to visit next month over Memorial Weekend.
Camping for Memorial Weekend has become somewhat of a tradition in our family.
We usually go up to the mountains with our extended family to the same campground every year; we have been doing this since I was a kid.
This year is a bit more complicated; dad needs new tires on their camping trailer and due to a lack of work, new tires are not in the budget right now.
We have been talking about different options including going camping in our tents, without the trailer.
However, my mom refuses to go without the trailer.
She needs a shower, she needs to do her hair and her makeup, she's not comfortable tent camping...there is no flexibility or reasoning on the issue.
I had a great idea.
We have a campground only a couple of miles away from our house.
It's not our usual, quiet place in the mountains, but it is close to home and has a lot of fun activities for the kids.
It's close enough that my dad could probably drive the trailer down, and if not, it's close enough to home that mom can come during the day and return to her comfort at home in the evening.
My dad seemed happy with this solution and talked to my mom about it.
However, she apparently did not hear what he said.
As I was driving her around yesterday, the topic came up.
Immediately, her defense came up and she got upset with me.
"Your dad wants to go to the mountains too.
And my brother's going too, he invited us too.
Your dad said we were going.
He really wants to go too."
Me: "Mom, dad can't afford the tires for the trailer right now and the trailer can't make it that far on those tires.
The only way we can go camping is to stay close to home."
Mom: "No, I'm not going camping in those other things" (tents) "I'm not comfortable in those.
I want the trailer.
I need a shower and to decorate my hair and other things too."
I tried to repeat my point, "Dad can't buy new tires right now, he isn't working."
To which she replied, "I already told him I'd give him the money from my savings or we could use the credit card too."
My once-frugal mother is losing the concept of money.
I tried explaining to her that they may need her savings for other things until dad gets some jobs lined up, and that to put something on a credit card means you have to have the money to pay it off.
I don't know if she doesn't hear when I am talking or if her mind just can't process the words I am saying (though I'm fairly certain it's the latter).
"No we can just put it on a credit card.
Your dad really wants to go.
And if you go that other place then I'm not going!"
This is the condensed version of the conversation.
Conversations like these can go on and on as we try to reiterate our point, hoping that she will hear what we are saying and eventually make sense of it.
I am learning that it is pointless to argue with her.
It makes as much sense as arguing with a two-year old.
They are stubborn, they want only what they want and do not hear (or cannot yet process) most of what you say.
They will pout and frown and make you miserable when they don't get what they want.
This is how my mom has become.
I am having to learn to let things go and not spend too much energy arguing and trying to reason with her.
A friend (who was a caretaker to her Alzheimer's mother) told me that there comes a point when you give up arguing altogether; you just smile and tell them you love them.
I understand her point completely.
It is emotionally exhausting.
I think I've been doing considerably well over the past couple of months.
For the most part, I have been able to keep my cool with her and I've been able to talk and interact calmly with her.
I was very patient with her when trying to book her a flight out to see her brother, which was a huge ordeal.
She was stubborn about which airport she flew out of (the more affordable airport is further away), stubborn about the times (they either left too early, came in too late, or took too long to get there)...she was confused on what luggage is and what layovers are (and why she has to fly to Colorado first to get to Montana) and threw little tantrums at the mere suggestion of a flight that wasn't ideal for her.
It was extremely tiring.
Yet somehow I was able to keep it together; my husband even commended me on my patience with her.
This week, I think I am feeling a bit depleted; my patience is running thin.
Yesterday, I was all too anxious to drop her off at home after our venture out.
It was all I could do to keep my composure and not lose it.
I hate that I feel like this.
There comes a point where it becomes too much to handle; as patient and understanding as we try to be, it becomes difficult in times when that feeling of depression is beginning to overwhelm your sense of reasoning.
I know that as bad as I am feeling, my dad is feeling worse.
It's no wonder why he has been feeling depressed lately.
I am beginning to feel it too.
I feel helpless.
I wish there was something that I could do for my mom to help her condition to improve; I wish there was something I could do for my dad to lift his spirit and help him to feel happy again.
I lay awake at night, worrying about both of them and the road that lies ahead.
My heart is heavy and I feel a dark cloud looming overhead.
I know that I need to do something.
I have heard that there are support groups for people dealing with dementia.
I've even researched it a little bit.
There is nothing specifically for Semantic Dementia, but there are support groups for Alzheimers.
I'm hesitant to go.
It won't really fix anything, it's not going to change my mom's condition.
But I know that I need to do something to strengthen myself.
My dad has been a rock for all of us over the years.
Now it's my turn to be his.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 19, 2012>
There is no cure for dementia.
There are some medications that are supposed to "slow down" the process, but nothing can stop the inevitable.
While researching the topic of how to slow down the process, I read that exposing the "ill" person to life experiences will help to slow the progression of the disease.
That means getting them out and doing things...shopping, vacations and trips, and so on.
Pretty simple, right?
Much easier said than done.
A couple of weeks ago, we celebrated Easter in San Jose with my Aunt.
Going to San Jose for Easter was a tradition for us while I was growing up, and we wanted to have our kids experience the magic of Easter as we once knew it.
We knew that it wouldn't be as smooth sailing this time around with mom; in fact, there are many complications in traveling with her.
A classic symptom of Semantic Dementia is to be set in a day-to-day routine and mom fits the mold perfectly of this characteristic.
It's hard for her to deviate from her normal routine, which makes getting out of the house a little tricky sometimes.
Mom's routine revolves around two things: sleep and medicine.
She stays in bed until 8:00 in the morning; it's extremely difficult to get her out of bed any earlier (although she seems to be doing okay getting up earlier on Sundays for church).
At 8:30 am she takes her medicine, followed by drinking her Slim Fast for breakfast.
She then showers and gets ready for the day, hair and make-up must be completely done whether she intends to leave the house that day or not.
At 10:00 am there is another medicine she takes for her headaches.
At 2:30 she has another round of medicine to take; all of these medicines are for her aches and pains that she has throughout the day: headaches from her "degenrative disc and narrowing spine", her fibromyalsia medicine...I could write an entire post just about her medication.
We'll save that for another day.
Back to her routine: at 6:00 pm she can take some more headache medicine if her headaches have returned.
At 8:30 pm she takes her last dose of medicine which includes a sleep aid that she is directed to take 1/2 hour before bedtime.
At exactly 9:00 pm, exactly 1/2 hour after her medication, she is in bed.
She has a hard time falling asleep.
Sometimes she'll lay awake for hours or wake up throughout the night.
But she must be in bed by 9:00 because "it's very important" to get her sleep.
She fills in the times around her medicine doing word puzzles, playing solitaire on the computer, going to doctor appointments, and occassionally washing some dishes in the sink or doing a load of laundry.
Sometimes she will sit on the couch and turn on some music and "exercise" by tapping her feet as she sits.
She normally takes a nap midday, as she gets tired often.
She cannot take her medication a minute late or a minute early.
She will generally stroll in to the kitchen a few minutes before medicine time, get her medicine ready, and hold it in her hand until the clock is exactly on the right time.
If we are out and about, she will look at whatever clock is nearby and then pull out her cell phone and compare times.
Her cell phone is the most accurate, so that is the time she will go by.
When I call mom to schedule errands or just a day out somewhere, her first response is always something like,  "The only thing is I have to be back by 2:30 because I have to take my medication."
Followed by my response,  "You can always bring your medication with you mom."
The first time she finally ventured out with her medicine (rather than waiting next to the clock at home), was when I took her out on a lunch date.
She chose her favorite fast food Mexican place, Miguel's Jr, despite my efforts to get her to venture out to a nicer, sit-down restaurant.
Before we left the house, she told me that she had to take her headache medicine at 12:30.
The first thing she did when we sat down at the table (around 12:10 pm) was get her bottle of medicine and set it on the table in front of her.
At 12:28, with her lunch finished, she opened the bottle and said, "It's 12:28, I think it will be okay if I take my medicine now."
I know it sounds bad, but I decided to have a little fun with her.
Conversations can become very depressing with mom; she can't talk about anything except her childhood memories, her health and medication, her not being able to drive...it gets very dull and lonely.
Sometimes we feel like we just need to make light of the situation and "spice it up" a bit.
So I played along with her.
"Are you sure you can take it two minutes early, mom?
Are you sure it'll be okay?"
I gave her a little smirk to show her that I was teasing with her.
But mom's sense of humor has long been gone.
She doesn't understand when a person is joking around with her.
She very seriously answered me, "No, it'll be okay.
It's only two minutes.
It'll be fine."
Still, she held the medicine in her hand, as if she wasn't really certain if taking it two minutes early would be acceptable or not.
She dug into her purse and found a piece of dental floss, which I had given her at my house the night before and she insisted was okay to clean and keep for later use, and flossed her teeth while she waited for the clock to change.
She cleaned off the floss yet again, placed it back in her purse and looked at her cell phone once more to verify the time.
12:29.
"It's 12:29 now, I think I can take it now."
She held it for about 20 seconds more before finally putting it in her mouth and flushing it down with a drink of water.
Her inflexibility in her routines and medication does make it difficult to go places; but we've been working on her little by little and have at least gotten to the point where we can convince her (usually) to just take her medicine along wherever we're going.
On the morning of Good Friday, my husband, children and I arrived at my parent's house around 7:30 am to load up my dad's truck and begin our drive up to San Jose.
To my surprise, mom was up and ready, stuffing the last of her things into a suitcase.
She had three bags just for herself, for our three day weekend trip.
She had a suitcase just for her hair and make up products.
She couldn't get it to all fit in the suitcase dad gave her and needed some help to work it out.
When I suggested that she leave some things behind (for example her blowdryer-the hotel provides one), she became agitated with me.
I knew leaving things behind wouldn't be an option so I found another bag and made it work for her.
She actually did pretty well on the drive up to San Jose.
She had to stop once for the bathroom.
Of course she had to stop at 12:00 for lunch; we had planned for this and stopped when we saw a Carl's Jr. so she could have her hamburger and milkshake.
She was silent for most of the drive, unless she had a critique for dad on his driving skills.
When we arrived to Aunt Peggy's house, the first thing mom said when we walked into the house was, "I can smell your dog in here.
It's so funny how I can always smell your dog whenever I come over."
I cringed when I heard her say it.
I knew she was going to say it; she said it the last time.
Her filter is gone; whatever is on her mind is on her tongue.
Aunt Peggy is very patient and understanding, she just gave her a hug and changed the subject.
The hardest part of the trip was working with mom's time schedule.
Dinner was a little later than her usual 5:30.
Aunt Peggy was making pizza, and only so many pizzas can be baked at one time.
The first pizza came out and we fed the kids...and mom.
She sat down with the kids and was done before any of them had a chance to let their pizza cool off.
This is the usual with her; she's always the first to eat and she eats as if she hasn't had food in days.
At 7:00-no matter if she's visiting at my house for our Sunday dinners, or if we're on vacation...wherever she's at-she begins pacing and talking about going home (or, in this instance, back to the hotel).
"When are we gonna go?
Because I have to get ready for bed and I have to take my medication at 8:30.
I have to be in bed by 9:00."
This trip was no exception.
It started around 7:00 and every ten minutes or so she would ask us when we were planning to leave.
It is like having a little child nagging at you, except a little child can't tell time and remind you how many minutes are left until he/she has to be in bed.
Since we had had a long drive up, the kids were a little tired too (surprisingly they didn't sleep in the car) so by 8:30 we wrapped up our first night's visit and made it back to the hotel.
As soon as we were in a parking spot, mom jumped out of the car and disappeared in the hotel before the rest of us had even gotten out of the car; I'm not kidding.
After I got my kids settled down (a few minutes past 9:00), I went next door to the room my parents were staying in, and sure enough, mom was in bed.
The rooms we booked were studio rooms, so the bed was off to the side of the kitchen and living room.
Mom kept yelling at dad for having the TV on, and the light.
"Why do you have the TV on at bedtime?....I can't sleep with that light...It's too noisy....You guys need to go to bed...You aren't supporting me..." The next day we went to the zoo.
Mom slept in as long as she could in order to be ready by 9:00 to leave to the zoo.
I thought she did better than expected during the six hours we were there.
She did complain about being hungry the closer we got to noon.
The exhibits we were visiting weren't close to food and we wanted to finish seeing everything in that area before we made it back around to food.
She reminded us quite frequently that she was hungry and that it was lunchtime.
I have small children; anyone who has small children, or has spent any length of time with small children, knows that when they want something they will not let up until they get it.
Especially when they are hungry.
My mom is the same way.
In fact, she is worse than my little kids.
It was close to 1:00 before we made it to a food stand.
Mom was the first to get her food and she finished before the rest of us even had a chance to get situated at the table.
While visiting the various animal exhibits, she seemed to enjoy seeing the different animals, but she couldn't remember what most of them were.
Sometimes she would ask, most times she just quietly walked around the exhibits and looked inside the cages.
That night, we went back to Aunt Peggy's to eat dinner, dye Easter eggs with the kids and visit.
Mom did okay...her conversations are always a bit awkward.
She has lost inhibition on what is appropriate conversation and what is inappropriate conversation.
But like I said, Aunt Peggy and her family are very patient and accepting.
They understand the situation and were just happy that we could be there.
Around 7:00 mom started getting antsy again.
At 8:30 she took her medicine and let us know that she did so and had to be in bed 1/2 hour after she takes it.
She needs to get back to the hotel now.
She needs to get ready for bed.
She needs her sleep or she's not getting up in the morning to go to Easter brunch with us.
A few times, she leaned into Jeff and told him to tell my dad that we needed to go, that the kids needed to go and that "he'll listen to you."
Back at the hotel, the same frustration and complaining ensued as the night before, with the lights and TV in the hotel room.
The next morning was Easter, starting with brunch at our traditional restaurant, Pedros.
I don't know if she made the connection that this was the restaurant had grown up eating at every year for Easter brunch.
She was concerned about what kind of food they had and whether or not she would like it.
Apparently she found some things that she liked and ate very little; she's not used to eating a big breakfast (it's usually Slim Fast).
Back at Aunt Peggy's house, we sent the men out to the park to hide hundreds of plastic Easter eggs for the kids.
Mom asked where they were going and I explained that they were hiding Easter eggs.
I got a very confused look in response, "Easter eggs?"
"Yes, the plastic Easter eggs that we filled with candy," I told her.
"What are you talking about?
Eggs with candy?
You mean those plastic round things that we put candy in?
Those aren't eggs."
"Yes mom, those are plastic Easter eggs.
We filled them with candy and now they're hiding them for the Easter egg hunt."
"Hide them?
Why would you do that?"
She followed us to the park and watched the kids as they ran and collected their eggs.
There were several people who went with us; my cousins, their kids, and a couple friends of theirs.
As soon as the first group left back to the house, she was gone.
It was almost 2:30.
That night was the most difficult night with her.
It was our last night visiting with our family, and we weren't ready to rush out the door early.
She became very upset when 8:30 came and went and we were still visiting.
At night 9:00 she was pacing and nagging us to go.
At 9:06 she came into the front living room, where my dad and I were talking with Aunt Peggy, and raised her voice and became angry.
"It's 9:06.
I need to get back to the hotel.
I need to get to bed, it's really important that I get my sleep...I took my medicine, I have to go to bed 1/2 hour after I take it..." We tried to calm her down, get her to relax on the couch or lay down somewhere.
There's no reasoning.
Finally, she gave her usual, defensive response, "You aren't supporting me...maybe I should go and die!"
and with that she stormed out of the room and back to the living room where my Uncle and Jeff were visiting.
According to Jeff, she was quite upset and complaining while sitting with them.
Not too long after her outburst, we said good-bye to Aunt Peggy and her family and drove back to the hotel, where mom ran upstairs and tucked herself into bed in record time.
The drive home was fairly quiet and uneventful with mom-other than the driving criticisms and complaints of being tired (she could not sleep in the car, she had to keep her eye on the road to be dad's side seat driver).
The normally-six-hour drive turned into eight-hours with traffic and potty breaks, and we arrived back to my dad's at 4:30 in the afternoon.
As soon as we got home, mom raced inside and locked herself in her bedroom for a nap, leaving dad with all the luggage and clean up.
Apparently it was a tiring weekend for her.
It's good to get people (who suffer from dementia) out and about.
It's tiring for the people who are taking them out.
It would be easier, sometimes, to just stay home and not have to deal with it.
This has been difficult for our family, and especially for my dad who has to deal with this day in and day out.
But, we are doing our best.
We want her to be around as long as possible, so we continue to do whatever we can to keep her mind active and give her experiences to help her thrive.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 28, 2012>
When I was a child, my mommy could kiss any boo-boo and make it better.
My mom was always a loving, compassionate mom.
I remember the days when I would have to stay home from school sick; as much as I hated being sick and missing my friends at school, I secretly enjoyed the special attention I got from mom.
She would lay out my pillow and blankie on the couch, turning on my favorite movies and make me hot jello broth to drink.
She waited on me hand and foot, making sure to soothe any pain I had.
When I had fevers, she would nurse me with a wet washcloth while I laid my head in her lap as she stroked my hair or scratched my back.When I was nine years old, I was hospitalized for asthma.
My mom was taking college courses at the time, and the college was across the street from the hospital.
In those three days that I spent in the hospital, she only left my side once to go to a class and turn in her work and get her other assignments.
She made sure though, that somebody was there with me while she was gone.
She slept on a cot in my room at night.
I can't imagine more devotion from a mother for her sick child.The first time I was sick without my mom was when I went away to college.
I had gotten a stomach bug and spent all night throwing up.
My sweet roommate, at the time, did her best to nurse me back to health.
But it wasn't the same as having my mom by my side.
She tried to comfort me over the phone, but I longed to have her there with me; I knew she would know just how to take care of me.I was the last of my friends to get married and start having babies.
As I watched each friend in the aftermath of their deliveries, I noticed that they all had their mothers there to stay with them for a while to help them adjust to their new roles as mothers.
I had no doubt that it would be the same for me, when my time would come that I would start my family.My first pregnancy came approximately 7 years ago.
I was SO sick.
For the first week of my morning sickness, I could hardly get out of my bed.
Even though my mom worked as a Head Start teacher in the afternoons, she would come over in the mornings to take care of me.
I remember her making me toast and bringing gatorade in hopes to keep me hydrated.
When my husband, Jeff, went out of town on a business trip, mom packed me up and had me come stay at her house so she could make sure I was taken care of.
When it was time for delivery, mom was thrilled to be there for the birth of her first granddaughter, my baby girl, Aubrey.
In the weeks afterwards, though she couldn't stay the night with me (due to her job), she was there nearly everyday to help me adjust to motherhood and make sure I got the nutrition I needed for breastfeeding.
I felt very fortunate to have my mom with me; although at the time I didn't realize just how lucky I was.Three years later, I found myself pregnant with my second child.
That pregnancy was worse than the first.
By this time, my mom's disease had begun (though we didn't know this at the time).
She was tired and achey all of the time, which she blamed on her heart condition, and really only thought about herself and her own aches and pains.
Indeed, she had become somewhat self-centered.
She would come by to help me only if I was completely desperate and had no other choice.
When I was about four months pregnant, and barely getting over my morning sickness, our house sold.
I had one week to pack up the contents of our entire house, with Christmas right in the middle of that week.
Jeff had no time off work to help me, as he had just started a new job the week prior.
I expected that my mom would be there to help me pack all of our belongings.
But she was too tired and it was her Christmas break; she wanted time to rest.
In between the nausea and sickness, I did my best to pack up our home-mostly by myself.
Lucky for me, there were 3 dear friends from church who came over and helped me pack up my kitchen.
"Where is your mom?"
I remember one friend asking.
I was embarassed to confess that she was at home, resting.
She should have been there for me.On moving day, we had those same friends, along with my dad, come help us move everything, despite my inability to finish packing.
By that point, things were just thrown into boxes and moved onto the truck.That following May, my doctor had set up my induction date for the delivery of our baby boy, Cody.
I called my mom, excited to know the pregnancy was almost at an end.
Of course my mom would be in the delivery room; that wasn't even a question.
When there was a pause on the other end of the phone, I asked,"You're going to be there, right?
"To which she responded, "I don't know, I guess it depends on how early it is.
I have a hard time getting up early these days.
I can always come by later when I wake up, I'm sure you won't have the baby yet.
"I hung up the phone feeling hurt and angry.
I was in utter disbelief at her selfish attitude.
This was not the mother I once had.
What was wrong with her?
Why was she acting so selfish?
?Delivery day came and she strolled in the labor and delivery room mid-morning (I had arrived around five o clock that morning).
She was happy to meet her new grandbaby, but left pretty quickly after he arrived; quite the contrast to my first delivery where she stuck around to attend her first bath in the nursery.
In the week following, she came over once or twice after work for about half an hour or so to see the baby.
But she was usually too tired to hang out for too long or to do anything helpful.Another three years later, I became pregnant with my third, and final, baby (who is now almost a year old).
This pregnancy was the worst yet.
It didn't help that I had three other kids to take care of: my own two children as well as my husband's niece, Maurina (then 14), whom we had adopted when Aubrey was a baby.
On a typical day, I was throwing up anywhere from 2-4 times; sometimes more, sometimes less.
I could hardly keep anything down.
It was hard to function.
I had no strength, no energy; it sounds drastic but I felt like I was dying, like I was slowly wasting away to nothing.
I was fortunate to have a friend who helped me transport Aubrey to and from Kindergarten each day, but I was still left to pick Maurina up from the high school every afternoon.
Most days I would lay on the couch all day, only getting up to tend to the kids; then I'd get the kids in the car to pick Maurina up from school and quickly pull into the driveway, leaving Maurina to get the kids out while I ran as quick as I could to the toilet.
It was all I could do to keep from pulling over on the side of the road on the way home to relieve my horribly upset stomach.When we had moved (during my second pregnancy), we bought a house a mile up the road from my parent's.
One would expect that I could call my mom to help me out; not the case.
By this time, her disease (still undiagnosed) had progressed to the point that it resulted in a leave from her job, which meant she was home all day long.
Not once did she come to take care of me.
Not once.
I remember one day, my son, Cody, got sick.
He had been running high fevers for a few days.
One afternoon, he woke up from his nap with a fever of 105 degrees!
Of course it was one of my worst days of morning sickness.
Every time I got off the couch, it resulted in a mad dash to the toilet bowl.
I was extremely stressed out and desperate for help.
I called my mom, knowing she wouldn't be jumping at the call to come help, but believing she would when I told her how high his fever had spiked.
Her response?
"I'm laying down right now, I'm just so tired, I'm not feeling so well today.
I'm sorry.
"After calling a couple other people and coming up with nothing, I lay on the bathroom floor in tears, while Cody sat in a lukewarm bath screaming his head off.
I cried out of fear for my child, I cried out of anger and frustration with my mom, I cried out of mere exhaustion; at that moment I felt so alone and devastated.
It was the moment when I was forced to face the cruel realization that I no longer had a mother to be there for me.She made it to the delivery room, where we welcomed Ryer into our family.
It was pretty much the same scenario as with Cody: strolling in the room at mid-morning and leaving as soon as he was out.
My OB also happens to be her OB, so as soon as he entered the room she made sure to tell him that she had an appointment with him in a few weeks because of all the pains she was having in her stomach, due to fibroids.After Ryder was born, I don't remember her coming over at all, aside from family dinners and other family gatherings.
A week after Ryder's birth, Jeff had to return to work and I was on my own.
I loaded the kids up in the car each morning and afternoon to take Aubrey to and from school.
This required parking up the hill from the school (parking is a nightmare over there!
), pulling out the heavy double stroller to load both boys in and pushing them downhill to the school and then back up to where we parked.
The crossing guard made a comment to me one morning, that first week after he was born,"I can't believe you're back out here already after just having a baby!
"What choice did I have?
Somebody had to take her to school.
This past week has been another tough one for me.
Aubrey developed a fever last week, along with a horrible cough and head cold, which she graciously shared with Cody and me.
I've been struggling to take care of the kids and give myself some rest at the same time.
When moms get sick, they don't get a day off.
I envy my sister-in-law, who has her mother to nurse her back to health and help with her kids whenever she gets sick.
I used to have that.
And I feel sad that I no longer have that for myself.
I am trying not to throw myself a pity party, but in the moments when I am weak, when I just want to go take a nap and rest my achey, feverish, sick body rather than tend to rowdy kids, I just want my mom back.
It doesn't matter how old you get, a girl always needs her mom.I've said it before: I've spent many years in anger with mom over these events.
I realize, now, that it is beyond her control.
It doesn't take the hurt away, but it's a different kind of hurt.
The anger that was once directed towards her has been rerouted.
I will always hold dear the memories of who my mom once was.
I know there will come a time when it will be my turn to repay her for the many years she spent nurtuing me back to health.
It's scary to look at the future and think about me nursing my mother; I'm not entirely sure of what that means yet.
But I am trying to prepare myself for what is to come.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 18, 2012>
My mom has always been the perfect driver, and I mean perfect.
We're talking a perfect 3-car following distance, hands always directly on ten and two o clock, stopping for a complete three seconds at the stop-sign, never going a mile over (or under) the speed limit...she was always a textbook driver.
In over 30 years of driving, she has never had a ticket or an accident.
Perfect.
With the memory loss problems she has been having, she has prided herself on her ability to continue driving.Over the past year or so, we've noticed mom's driving skills are not quite up to her once-high standard.
She tailgates and puts on the brakes suddenly.
I remember following behind her in our own car, not too long ago, and she suddenly slammed on the brakes at a green light because a small tumble weed had blown in front of her.
Luckily we had a safe distance between us and were able to stop before we hit her.
Another time, she was driving my dad and reminiscing about her old family home down the street and she slowed down her speed.
Dad had to tell her that it wasn't safe to suddenly slow down in the middle of traffic just to lookey-loo around.
Needless to say, we haven't felt too comfortable with her behind the wheel and more recently we won't ride in the car with her driving.
She, however, sees no problems in her driving, even after her very first fender-bender a couple of months ago.
She was backing out of her parking spot when she hit a car behind her.
She claims that person came from out of nowhere, and that is possible.
But with her focus and attention difficulties, it's hard to know the truth.
That was the first time we were forced to think about if she was really safe behind the wheel.We knew it would be a battle when the day came that we'd have to take the keys, and quite honestly, I think it was a battle that my dad was not ready to face.
UCLA made the decision for us, ready or not.
They informed my dad that they are mandated reporters, which means that they are madated to report to the DMV the diagnosis of mom.
They told him that they would receive a notice in the mail from the DMV and that mom could go down to the DMV to take a test if she was adamant that she is still able and competent to drive.
The doctor wrote my dad an order on a perscription slip of paper with the words "Do Not Drive".
Mom was very unhappy with the "stupid" doctors who said she couldn't drive and would not accept their order.
My dad thought that he needed to break her in slowly (let her get used to the idea for a little bit) and was under the impression that she was still able to drive until they received notice from the DMV.
After talking it over with several people-my sister, my Aunt and Uncle, another Aunt, and myself-my dad finally accepted the harsh reality that he was going to have to take the car keys.Saturday night, my dad tried explaining to my mom that she was not allowed to drive.
He told her that I would be over to pick her up at 8:30 am the following morning for church, since he would already be gone to church meetings prior to 8:30.
She argued back and forth with him, not comprehending why she was ordered not to drive.
She insisted that she's "a good driver".
He tried to explain to her that she has a condition called dementia, and that people with dementia are not allowed to drive.
That explanation went completely over her head.I knew that she wasn't going to readily accept her new fate.
And so I was prepared that on Sunday morning, I would most likely have a fight on my hands.
I called her at 8:15 to remind her that I was coming.
She gave me an adamant "NO, you are not coming to drive me, I can drive myself....I don't know why they're saying I can't drive, I've always been a good driver..." The argument ensued for the next ten minutes as I tried to calmly and gently explain to her that she was not allowed to drive.
She wouldn't give in.
Frustrated, I tried to call my dad.
No answer.
I sent him a text stating that she was refusing to go with me.
I got in the car and drove to my mom's house.
When I walked in the door, she had her back to me and ignored me, looking for something in a box of paperwork on the floor.
I could see right away that she was mad.
Fuming mad.
With much hostility in her tone, she told me,"I'm not going with you, no.
I can drive myself".I asked her what she was looking for.
"That paper thing your dad says the doctor wrote.
I want to see that.
"Immediately, I found the note written on the prescription slip with the orders "Do Not Drive".
I showed it to her, and she snatched it from my hand.
Remaining calm, I tried to explain to her what the note meant.
If she were caught driving against these orders, she could get in trouble.
My words didn't register with her.
"I'm feeling really sad that you guys are all picking on me.
I'm not happy with this doctor, he doesn't even know me.
I'm not a bad driver, there's no reason why I can't drive.
"Everything she says is with anger and hostility in her tone and with a scowl on her face.
She put the note in her purse.
"I'm taking this to my Bishop too.
And I'm taking it to Dr. Thio too.
I'm mad at your dad for doing this to me.
"I take a deep breath, "Mom, your Bishop can't do anything about it and neither can Dr.
Thio.
"She responded with, "I don't know why he's punishing me.
I'm not going back to those doctors, I don't like them.
It makes me feel like maybe I should just go die then!
"When she gets angry, and feels like she is being picked on, mom makes comments about dying.
At first, we weren't sure how to respond to this.
Sadly, we are becoming accustomed to these outbursts and know that it is her defense mechanism.I tried to tell her that nobody is punishing her.
We are not doing this because we're upset with her.
I put my arm around her and told her that we are taking her to these doctors because we love her and want to help her.
These doctors at UCLA are the best of the best, they have found out what is going wrong in her brain and it's called dementia.
People with dementia are not able to drive.
Sure, she may be okay today.
But over time it will get worse and she may end up hurting somebody, or hurting herself.She shook her head and answered with a firm and angry "No.
I'm not going with you.
I just won't go to church then."
She plopped down on the couch, with her arms folded on her lap, each hand hugging the opposite elbow and her back slumped over.I sighed.
Just then, my dad called.
He told me he had just gotten out of his meeting.
He asked to talk to my mom; she refused to talk to him.
He told me that he would swing by to talk to mom and coax her to come with him to church.
I sat next to my mom on the couch while I waited for my dad, and with her head hung down and eyes fixed on her skirt, she snaps,"At least this shirt matches this color," as she points to a paisley design in her skirt."What?"
I was a little taken aback by the abrupt change in subject.
"At least this shirt matches.
My skirt has some of this other blue color too.
It's good I don't have to wear my black shirt," she says, not looking up, and most certainly not without the scowl on her face or crank in her tone.I gave her a smile.
"It's a nice skirt mom, is this the new one you bought at Kohl's the other day?
'"Yes," she snapped back.
It was quiet for a minute, and then she began her rant and argument about the driving situation.
"I have to drive....I have appointments to go to, you're not gonna take me to them..." It goes on and on.A few minutes later, my dad walked through the door.
Initially, she ignored him.
When she could no longer resist, she stood up and began her protest once again with him.
He told her that "besides, your tire on your car is flat.
You can't drive your car anyway" to which she accused him "you did that on purpose."
(In fact, it was just a coincidence that her back tire had become flat that morning...I hadn't even noticed it when I walked to the door).She continued to argue and looked at the clock; 8:45.
She once again threw herself on the couch and said "I'm gonna be late now.
I'm just not going!
"It takes 10 minutes to get to the church.
One of mom's obsessions is time.
She has to be very early or she thinks she's late.
My dad was very patient and very gently took her by the arm and said "Come on dear, let's go.
"Eventually, after a few more protests, she gave in.
But she made sure that my dad knew the entire drive to the church that she was not happy about this and that she was going to make sure to tell her other doctors about this.
She will not go down without a fight!At family dinner that night, she pulled my Aunt into my daughter's room as soon as Aunt Sharon walked in the door (Aunt Sharon is a nurse).
She told her all about the incident and asked her what she thought.
Aunt Sharon was very honest; she told her that we did the right thing and tried to explain some things to my mom.
Most of it went over her head.
She holds firm that she has always been a good driver and doesn't deserved to be "punished".Today I drove her to her hair appointment.
She seems to have calmed down a bit.
Maybe once her tire is fixed she'll get a new wind.
She told me she was thankful that I drove her to get her hair done.
She also expressed her feelings, yet again, on the topic.
I expect it will be a hot topic for quite some time.
Every new person she runs into will hear all about it.
We just need to be patient with her.
It's a hard thing to lose one's independence.
I feel for her.
I know this isn't any easier on her as it is with us.
We, at least, understand her condition.
She is not capable of grasping what is going on in her brain.
In the meantime, we are all doing our best to help this transition go smoothly.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 13, 2012>
When somebody near and dear to you is diagnosed with a terminal illness, there is a cycle of grief that you generally go through.
In fact, it even has a name: the Kubler-Ross Five Stages of Grief.
Generally, it refers to the person who is diagnosed with the illness.
But I believe it is very much the same for the family members and close friends of the diagnosed person as well.
The stages differ for each person.
Some may skip a stage.
Some stages linger longer than others.
And sometimes you return to stages that you've already gone through.
There is no one way to go about this process; grieving is a very personal thing.
But in general, there is a pattern of 5 different stages that people go through when they learn they will be losing someone they love.1.
Denial: "The test results must be wrong"..."there must be a mistake"..."there is some way that we can beat this"...these are all common thoughts during this stage.
It's a difficult thing to accept a devastating reality, and many people refuse to believe it.2.
Anger and grief: This can manifest itself in many different ways.
Some people feel angry with themselves; other times their anger is taken out on others around them.
There is a feeling of wanting to blame somebody for what is happening.3.
Bargaining: If a person has a God he/she believes in, there is usually pleading or bargaining with Him to spare the life of the ill person.4.
Despair and depression: This is similar to grief.
but with depression comes an emotional attachment with a sort of acceptance.
Each person handles depression differently, but usually a person who is depressed detaches themselves from others, preferring to be alone with their feelings of despair.
It's natural to feel sadness, regret, fear, etc.
These are the steps to acceptance.5.
Acceptance: This varies greatly from person to person, but generally there is some sort of emotional detachment as the person accepts what is to come.
The person diagnosed with an illness usually comes to this point much sooner than the family/friends they leave behind.Like I said, this is a cycle, which means it goes round and round.
You may find yourself working through one stage, getting through it, and then returning to it at a future date.
I think it also varies with each illness.
In our case, dealing with dementia has been quite a different experience than dealing with other diseases; for example, Lou Gehrig's disease (which we experienced with my grandfather).
Though there are the 5 basic stages of grieving, I think there is a far broader range of emotions that one goes through when dealing with this sort of illness.My mom's "illness" has been an interesting cycle for us.
I can't write exactly what my family has experienced in this cycle (though I've seen them go through various stages); what I can write about is my experience with it.
It is unique, in that we did not get the "earth shattering" news all at once.
As I explained before, this has been a gradual process, beginning around the time of her surgery (and in hindsight, it actually started at least a year before her surgery).
I would say that my grieving process started before I had any idea that she was "sick"; I just didn't realize it at the time.
I have felt a broad range of emotions over the past few years: hurt, anger, frustration, resentment, guilt, sadness-just to name a few.
It's been hard to process all of these emotions-mostly because I didn't realize they were attached to an illness.
It makes so much more sense now that we have a diagnosis and I feel like I am finally able to sort out many unresolved issues that I have had over the past few years.Semantic Dementia begins with a sort of detachment between the person and the people in their lives.
They become forgetful and distracted, tired and self-centered.
In the beginning, I felt hurt when my mom started to lose interest in me and in my children.
I felt hurt when I would call her on the phone to vent a frustration, a sadness or even a joy, only to hear her on the other line changing the subject to the ache she's been feeling in her arm; no response to what I had just said to her.
She never wanted to be bothered to watch the kids so we could go out on a date night; she was always too tired.
It hurt to see other grandmas doting on their grandbabies and I felt like there was something wrong with me, or my kids, that made my mom detach.
I couldn't understand it or make sense of it.Eventually her detachment led me to anger.
Why didn't she care anymore about what I have to say?
Why didn't she want to engage and take advantage of living closeby her grandbabies?
I felt resentful at her selfishness, and angry that she did not appreciate having us live nearby and that she did not seem to want the close mother/daughter relationship I craved; the relationship we once had.
I felt resentment when I would see friends going out and spending time with their mothers.
Why couldn't I have a relationship like that with my mom?
I had once had it, why had it changed?
What did I do wrong?I felt myself begin to pull away from her.
I suppose it was a wall I had built to guard myself against the pain of rejection.
For a while, I was bitter and maybe even cold towards her.
I can remember it being Mother's Day, and while I celebrated the joy of being a mother, I secretly mourned my mother because I felt that, in many ways, I had no mother.
I had pent up feelings of anger and bitterness inside and didn't feel like I had much to celebrate with my mom.
I feel guilty about those feelings now, knowing what I know about her illness.
But at the time, I was unaware of what was going on with her and I was reacting only at the hurt that I felt.As time went on, and her behavior became more and more odd, my anger started to turn to frustration.
It was apparent that something else was going on, and we suspected it was due to her surgery.
My sister and I researched several options of what was making mom so "weird" and after stumbling upon information about "temporal lobe damage", we concluded that was the cause.
Of course the anger returned, this time directed at the doctors who we felt were responsible.
Somebody needed to be held responsible for the damage that was caused, for the person they took away from us.
We even went so far as consulting an attorney on the issue.
We took my mom's 8-inch thick medical file to that attorney's office and were convinced he would tell us we had a case.
Instead, he looked through the file, reading her history, zeroing in on her surgery, and said that, although there was definitely something going on with her, nothing looked out of the ordinary as far as the surgery was concerned.
We were left feeling confused, angry and hopeless.Several people had thrown out the idea of dementia.
Perhaps part of this was the denial phase for me.
I was adamant that it was not dementia, but brain damage from the surgery.
It was the only thing that made sense to me-to my entire family.
I suppose deep down we all knew it was a possibility.
But to admit dementia was to admit that she would never come back.
Even with "brain damage", she would never return to the person she once was.
But we thought she would eventually adapt and learn to live with the changes and live a somewhat normal life.
With dementia, there is nowhere to go but downhill.It has been a week since mom's trip to UCLA, where the doctors have said that all signs point to Semantic Dementia.
As I researched exactly what that meant, my heart hurt and I experienced so many emotions over those next few days.
I felt guilt; guilt that I had so wrongly misjudged her.
I felt anger; angry that I would inevitable lose my mom.
I felt fear of what is to come in the future.
I watched my grandfather suffer in his final days, as he lost the ability to care for himself.
Is this what is to come for my mother?
Is she going to eventually forget who I am?
Will she be unable to care for herself at some point?
I feet sadness at the time that I had wasted in my misguided anger at her.
I feel sorry for what has happened to her.
Her life, as we once knew it, is gone and she's still relatively young; only 50 years old.I know that this will be a rollercoaster ride.
I feel much stronger now than I did a week ago when we received the initial news.
But I am sure that will change as time goes on.
We are still awaiting an MRI, where they will get a closer look at what is going on in her brain.
I have prepared myself, mentally, for more bad news.
Even though I feel strong now, I may revert back to a "depression" or "denial" stage, depending on what the results say.I think that over the past week, I have had some time to reflect.
I wouldn't say that I have passed the grieving stage completely.
I am finally able to talk about it without crying (for now, anyway).
I have realized, to some degree, what this disease means and I know that there are some tough times ahead.
I know that everyday is a gift from God, and we must use this time wisely.
I will not spend another day angry and bitter, ashamed and embarassed at my mother.
Instead, I will embrace the time that I have left with her.
I am preparing myself to be there, physically and emotionally, for both my mom and my dad.
I'm prepared for a rough road ahead, but I am thankful to have a strong family to help each other get through the ups and downs that lie ahead.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 11, 2012>
One night, when I was pregnant with my first child, I made the mistake of watching "The Notebook" for the very first time.
The movie starts with the romantic story of young love and evolves into a heartwrenching tale of that same young girl who had developed dementia and forgotten her husband.
He reads to her from a notebook every night, in hopes that he will spark her memory of the powerful love they once shared.
I'm not generally a crier in movies.
But as I saw the scenes play out, with his determination to "bring her back", it broke my heart.
I bawled my eyes out that night.
There were three things I concluded from watching that movie: 1-never watch a tearjerker when you're pregnant 2-when it's my time to go, it will be in my sleep with my husband's arms wrapped around me, the two of us leaving this earth together and 3-dementia is one of the most devastating diseases known to man.
That movie haunted me for the better part of the weekend.
I couldn't shake off the feeling of sadness.
Imagine living in a world where you can't remember anyone, least of all the people who you loved and have loved you best.
Imagine having your loved one not remember who you are.
What a painful situation.My mind now wanders back to "The Notebook".
Is that what the end will look like for my mom?
Will there come a point in time where my mom will no longer remember who I am?
Will there come a point where she will no longer remember my dad, who has been her sweetheart since childhood?
The thought of it stabs me in the heart.
I don't know all of the answers.
There are many unknowns and I've compiled my list of questions for the next trip to UCLA.
In the meantime, I've done my research in hopes of finding some answers to these difficult questions.
I'm afraid the answers haven't brought me any comfort.
I've spent the past three days on the verge of tears.
I am finding it difficult to concentrate on much else.
My mind keeps returning to the studies I've read on the disease.
My heart aches as I picture the road that lies ahead.
This is what I've learned about Semantic Dementia.First, Semantic Dementia is very rare.
It is a genetic defect that usually comes "out of the blue", with no family history of the illness.
Although it can be hereditary, it is a small percentage of the Semantic Dementia "population" where this is the case.
This is probably the best news I have read on the illness.
I would be lying if I said that the fear hasn't crossed my mind that I will someday inherit dementia.
The age of onset is usually between the ages of 50-65, give or take a few years.
My mom will be 51 in May; she was 46 when she likely began exhibiting these symptoms.Sematic Dementia is in the frontotemporal lobe dementia category, which makes sense why we at first thought it was temporal lobe damage from her surgery (many of the symptoms are the same).
There are four major symptoms to look for in Semantic Dementia:1.
Language-sufferers will have a hard time remembering what certain objects are called.
They will use words incorrectly.
They have a hard time processing things that are said to them and difficulty in processing what words mean.2.
Recognition of Faces and Objects-they have difficulty recognizing people whom they do not see regularly.
They can also have difficulty recognizing certain objects (such as a carrot in the grocery store).3.
Memory-there is problem in memory, but only a certain type of memory, which is called Semantic memory.
Semantic memory tells you who faces represent, what objects signify, what words mean.
While there is a disconnect in this area of memory, other memories are well preserved, such a how to drive to familiar places, or recalling certain events from the past.4.
Personality and Behavior- sufferers become inflexible and self-centered.
They have no awareness of the feelings of others.
They may become preoccupied with only a few activities and adopt a fixed daily routine (they have to do certain things at certain times).The sufferer is not able to control any of these behaviors or difficulties.
They are usually aware of some of the difficulties; my mom knows that she has a problem remembering who people are.
It is embarassing for her.
But she does not understand the extent of her disabilities, as is the case with all sufferers of Semantic Dementia.I stumbled onto a site which broke down the stages of Semantic Dementia.First comes the mild stage.
Memory of day-to-day events are usually spared.
This stage starts with the language problems.
Words that aren't commonly used are replaced by words such as "thing".
My mom has adopted some new favorite words.
She uses the word "too" at the end of nearly every sentence.
She says "thing" for objects or words that she can't remember.
Other favorite words, which will come up in any given conversation, include "blessing", "severe", "correctly" or "incorrectly", "supportive", "delicious".
She'll use phrases like "which is good" repetitively.After a few years comes the moderate stage.
This is when they have trouble understanding what others are saying.
There is increasing difficulty in recognizing faces and names of people, even friends and family.
They develop behavioral problems similar to those who suffer frontotemporal lobe damage (ftd).
Mom has much difficulty in these areas, as I have already mentioned.
If she does not see a person on a regular basis, she will not remember who they are.
It doesn't matter if that person was her maid of honor and best friend for 15 years.
It doesn't matter if they nieces or nephews that have been away for a while, or my best friend who was like a daughter to her.
If she doesn't see them regularly, she cannot place them.After 4-5 years is the severe stage.
This is where the disease becomes more advanced.
Their behavior becomes worse.
Some behaviors include apathy, compulsions, altered food preference, impaired facial recognition and weight gain.
They tend to show interest in games with symbols and words.
When I read about the "severe" stage, my heart sank into my stomach.
This is my mom in a nutshell.
Aside from the memory/recognition problems, and her behavior problems, she has gained weight (which she constantly complains about) and has developed an altered food preference.
She loves hamburgers, milkshakes, tortellini and frozen mixed vegetables.
Those are her staple foods.
She is a picky eater-worse than my three year old.
If we fix something she doesn't like, she brings her "delicioius" tortellini.
She has compulsive behaviors; she will not step a toe onto the porch without her make-up on.
She is obsessed with her time schedule.
She has to take her medication on the dot...8:30 am, 2:30 pm, 8:30 pm.
Not a minute before, not a minute after.
Lunch is at noon, dinner is at 5:30 and bedtime is 9:00.
My mom spends her days playing card games on the computer and doing word puzzles on the couch.It is alarming, but it seems as though she fits under the severe category.What is the prognosis?People diagnosed with Semantic Dementia are usually given between 6-8 years to live.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 10, 2012>
It's always been hard for me to verbally express how I am feeling.
Now I'm not talking about if you cut in line in front of me at the grocery store, or if you have something rude to say about my kids.
In those situations, I have no problem telling you exactly what I think.
But when it comes to things that are near and dear to my heart, things that really dig into my emotions, it is a different story.
I tend to bottle those feelings up inside of me.
I find it easier to express my thoughts and my emotions through writing, rather than through spoken word.My mom has been acting funny for the past few years.
She was born with a heart murmur, and over the past several years, her condition had worsened.
It eventually got to the point that she needed a repair on her leaky heart valve.
In order to avoid open heart surgery, she opted to try a new procedure where the doctors went in labroscopically to repair the damage.
Because this doctor had never before done this procedure, there was a long waiting period until the actual surgery took place.
During that wait time, my mom began to change.
She began to tire easily, she lost a lot of energy.
She developed a lot of aches and pains.
She started losing interest in her grandkids, which she attributed to her fatigue and body aches.
All of this, she said, was a result of her heart condition.
The surgery would make it better, she assured us.
We were frustrated with the changes we saw in mom, and we all counted down the days for her surgery, in hopes that the mom and grandma we once knew would return back to normal.Fast forward now to surgery, June of 2009.
The new procedure was a success-as far as her heart was concerned.
It took longer than anticipated, totaling 12 hours of time under anesthesia.
She had a little bit of internal bleeding, but they immediately took her back in and corrected the problem.
Nothing seemed out of the ordinary during those first few weeks of her recovery.
Within a few months, however, we started noticing problems with her memory.
She was becoming a little forgetful with names and faces.
She would run into friends at the grocery store and draw a blank on who they were.
When discussing this with her doctor, it was concluded that there could be several reasons for her forgetfulness.
Maybe it was menopause.
Maybe it was the surgery; sometimes after a surgery (particularly a heart surgery) and anesthesia, it can take a while for people to get back to "normal".
They say that memory can slightly be affected and that it could take a full year for a person to be back to their normal selves.
We waited, trusting in the doctors, thinking that it was just the aftermath of anesthesia.Moving forward: January of 2010.
My mom's mother very suddenly passed away.
My mom was extremely close to grandma.
As soon as I got the phone call, I raced to my mom's house, sure that she was falling apart.
When I arrived at her house, I could tell she had been crying.
She went to her room to do her hair and make-up so that we could go grandma's house, where the family was gathered.
And by the way, nobody else bothered to do their hair and make-up before going over.
We all thought it was bizarre behavior.
As she went back to her room to get ready, she wiped away the last of her tears, and I mean the last of her tears.
Throughout the next week and even at the funeral, mom shed no tears for her beloved mother.At grandma's house, the family all mourned her sudden death and voiced their concerns about grandpa (who was dying of Lou Gehrig's disease).
Mom voiced her concern about the charter bill and my sister's car payment, which was late.
She rambled to my cousins about her pioneer ancestors, while we all just sat there crying and trying to make sense of what had just happened to grandma.At grandma's funeral, my dad's brother came to offer his condolences.
My mom looked at him and said "Remind me who you are again?"
She could not place her brother-in-law, whom she had known for over 30 years.I think that was the turning point for us in realizing that there was something wrong with mom.
Something really wrong, more than just the "affects" of surgery wearing off.As time went on, mom's memory worsened, and her behavior became more and more bizarre.
In late 2010, she had an incident at work, which resulted in a temporary suspension and tension between her and her co-workers.
She lost focus on any conversations that were not about her, or what was on her mind.
In fact, we discovered that there were really only 3 topics that she would conversate about: her problems at work, her health (constant complaints of every ache and pain in her body), and her religion/pioneer ancestry.
Every person she came into contact with had to hear the same stories and conversations on one of these 3 topics.Throughout 2011, her memory continued to worsen.
People often approached me to say "I saw your mom in the store the other day...she looked scared when I talked to her...she acted like she didn't know me".
We would have conversations at the dinner table, sometimes even about her, and she had no clue what we were talking about.
She couldn't focus on what we were saying.
She had some very strange social behaviors and felt like everyone was "picking" on her when we would disagree with one of her oddities.
This was when my dad began to get aggressive on finding answers to her problems.
He went to one doctor after another, only to come out with no resolution.
A CT scan in August showed that there was some "shrinkage" in the brain, but aside from writing her a prescription for meds, the neurologist did nothing to help us understand what this meant.
In fact, he kind of dismissed it and offered the test results only as an afterthought as he talked about his own experience of heart surgery.Over the course of the last year, our frustration has grown immensely (to say the least).
Mom's condition seems to be getting worse.
Her behavior has, at times, driven us on the verge of insanity, and we are getting no answers from any of these "specialists" that we have taken her to see.
My dad has had the stress of battling with social security, after she took a leave from work due to her inability to function properly, only to have her denied because the doctors see no reason to sign a disability form.
Each one refers us to the next guy, and nobody will take responsibility and sign the forms, even though it is quite clear that she is not in her right mind and is unable to work at full capacity.
They are quick to give her drugs, but not so quick to take the time to figure out what is wrong with her.We began our own research (with the CT scan results as our base) and were pretty much convinced that the damage in her brain was due to a lack of oxygen during her 12 hour surgery in 2009.
My sister and I researched "temporal lobe damage" and many of the behaviors she exhibited seemed to coincide with that diagnosis.
Problem solved.
Now if we could only get the doctors to get on the same page as us and try to figure this out.No such luck.
It's one big game of ring-around-the-rosies.
My dad has made phone call after phone call, gone from doctor appointment to doctor appointment, even collected all of her medical records, consulted an attorney, and still at the end of it came out empty handed.
No answers.
Among the phone calls he made was a call to the UCLA Medical Center, a place where people travel across the globe to seek answers for their medical mysteries.
He was able to get an appointment for mom to meet with the specialists there.
Finally, a glimmer of hope.That brings us to this week: mom's appointment at UCLA.
At 9:00 am, dad made the drive out to UCLA.
At 6:30 pm, he finally made it back home.
Granted, California traffic sucks.
But he, and my mom, spent a good amount of time with a panel of doctors who actually took the time to access her condition.
They looked at her medical history, they looked at her CT scan, they observed her behaviors, they talked with her and with my dad, they asked dad questions, they asked mom questions.
They took their time and genuinely listened and showed concern for everything my dad had to say.
They are dedicated to finding answers for my mom, for our family.This is the good news.
The bad news is that this is not brain damage from the surgery.
Why is that bad news?
It's bad news because it means that she has dementia.
They are 90% certain that she suffers from a very rare form of dementia, called Semantic Dementia.
An MRI will be scheduled in the very near future to get a more clear look at what is going on in her brain.
But based on everything we have to say, based on the CT scan, their observations, her medical history and other questions asked and tests they performed, it seems almost certain that it is Semantic Dementia.
An MRI will only seal the deal.
They sent dad home with a booklet on information about the disease.
I read the booklet.
I've googled the facts.
I've visited several websites.
I'm convinced their diagnosis is accurate.
The outlook is not so good.So here I am.
I have spent the past 3 days in a fog, as the words play over and over in my brain.
Semantic Dementia.
I know what this means.
We have a very long road ahead of us.
I write this blog for my own, personal therapy.
I write this blog for all of those who ask what is going on with my mom.
I write this blog to get a better understanding of this disease and in hopes to provide answers to others who might find themselves in this situation.
This is our journey with dementia.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, April 3, 2020>
Now that we are all social distancing due to COVID-19, I think about Jim and how he loved to get together with family.
I don't know if he would have been able to handle social distancing.
Well, he did social distance from the other residents in the Memory Care unit.
Some of them tried to befriend him, but he didn't seem to notice them unless they got in his way.
He did pay more attention to the nurses and the aides.
In fact, he seemed to become attached to some of them.
Before dementia, Jim loved to get together with family and friends for big dinners.
Typically, everyone would pull out their musical instruments and have an impromptu jam session.
I never played an instrument and seldom sang, but when I did, I sang with Jim.
He could throw in harmony and always made me sound better than I actually was.
A couple of years ago I bought a ukulele just to see if I could learn to play a few tunes.
My thoughts were, I'd be serious when I cut off the long nails I'd had my entire life.
Well, it wasn't long before I realized that I wasn't ever going to learn how to play until I trimmed the nails on my left hand.
After I learned a few chords, my brother Jimmy encouraged me to join the Capps Family Band for practice.
Then, he said I might as well go with them when they played music at the nursing homes.
Eventually, he tricked me into singing a song, and the next thing I knew, I was on the schedule.
Now, I realize that with the social distancing, one of the things I miss the most is playing music with the band.
I miss our two practice sessions where we figure out what songs will be on the playlist.
I miss seeing the residents' faces as we perform our program.
They really love my 93-year-old mom, who, in turn, loves to sing for the "old folks." My niece, Amy, is so talented she could sing the phone book and it would be stunning.
Of course, last practice she worked on "Goodbye Earl" which is an entirely different kind of song.
My sister, Roberta, had "Rocky Top" ready for the next program.
Mitchell was going to sing, "My Rifle, My Pony, and Me." Kathy has a great selection of songs and one she planned on singing was "I Heard it in a Love Song." Jimmy was going to sing a song he stole from me--"Dream Lover." Well, we had to cancel February, and, of course, the March program was cancelled due to COVID-19.
It was a good program, and I know that someday we'll get to see our favorite folks at the nursing homes again.
My brother Jimmy has been picking up his guitar and he or Kathy video a song each day.
I decided I wanted to video one of the songs I planned on singing in February--"Cowboy's Sweetheart." Jimmy makes it look a lot easier than it is.
Jimmy and the band play the music when I sing at nursing homes.
If I mess up, it isn't too noticeable.
I like to sing "fun" songs, so it makes my day if I can make the residents smile.
Jimmy likes to say that what I lack in talent, I make up for with courage.
Without the audience, without the band, I recorded "Cowboy's Sweetheart." Most of my home recordings are never, ever going to see the light of day, but I thought this one might make someone smile.
If I accomplish that--it will make my day!
Copyright (c) April 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 28, 2020>
Many years ago, Jim's parents, Bill and Virginia, noticed a squirrel that hopped up on their patio, day after day.
They started to feed the little fellow and looked forward to his daily visits.
One day the power went out.
A couple of linemen from the electric cooperative where I worked drove out to fix the problem.
The line superintendent called me on the intercom and said, "We found the problem.
Their pet squirrel got into the transformer." Later, my grandson Colby told me that the squirrel had "an unfortunate accident." People have unfortunate accidents too.
I recently read about a couple who heard the president talking about an anti-malarial drug, chloroquine showing promise as a treatment for COVID-19.
They knew that they have chloroquine phosphate to treat their koi.
They mixed up a small amount and took it.
They both immediately became ill.
The woman vomited and lived, her husband, unfortunately, died.
Why would they do such a thing?
They had probably heard about off-label use of drugs for years.
Once they heard about the studies, they probably felt fortunate enough to have some on hand.
Other people are enrolling in studies and trying other drugs to stave off or shorten the effects of COVID-19.
France and Italy are using hydroxychloroquine to treat COVID-19 although its effectiveness is unknown.
The unfortunate thing about experiential off-label use of a drug in a pandemic is that people who take the drug for chronic conditions such as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, or sarcoidosis find it "out of stock."  India, where many of our drugs are manufactured, is not exporting the raw ingredients for hydroxychloroquine.
They are recommending their medical professionals take the drug to prevent developing COVID-19.
In the USA, pharmacists are reporting shortages as off-label use of the drug for the pandemic soars.
People who have used the drugs for years to maintain their health are now finding it unavailable.
It is unreasonable for healthy people to take a drug for off-label use when it might endanger the health of people whose lives depend on an uninterrupted supply of medication.
These drugs have side-effects and it may be a case where the cure can be worse than the disease.
Off-label use can be a slippery slope.
I took issue with the anti-psychotic drugs physicians prescribed for Jim.
First, Jim was on a new Alzheimer's drug that caused him to start bleeding and to feel bad.
He had only been off the drug for a few days when he got into a scuffle with another resident and was kicked out of the nursing home.
Fast forward to "regenerations." They prescribed an anti-psychotic drug that made foam flow out of his mouth.
Jim couldn't eat or drink and he paced constantly, and acted like an angry insane man.
He dropped weight and looked like he was on the verge of dying.
My son and I told them to either take him off the drug, or we would take him to a different hospital.
The doctor said that the drug couldn't have those side-effects and that they "would not be responsible" for how he acted without the drug.
We insisted.
Signed papers, etc.
Within a few days of being off the drug, he returned to his normal self.
Throughout Jim's disease, we fought the anti-psychotic drugs since most of them did not work on him and made him worse.
Drugs that "calmed" or more accurately "zoned out" other residents would agitate Jim.
My feelings are that when using a drug off-label, use with extreme caution and only under a physician's close supervision.
If you start having strange side effects, stop taking the drug!
In addition, don't try a long shot off-label use when others need them for chronic conditions.
Maybe the best route to take with COVID-19 is wait until the studies are complete.
I wouldn't want any of my friends or family to have an unfortunate accident.
Copyright (c) March 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 21, 2020>
My life is usually so busy that my calendar can have as many as three events on the same day.
I toss so many balls into the air that occasionally one smacks me on top of my head.
Lately, meetings and events have been scheduled, and cancelled.
My calendar was covered with so many changes, delays, and rescheduled events, that I finally gave up and bought a dry erase board.
It's been handy for changes, because I can just erase a date, or time, and write in the new info.
Sometimes, I don't feel like I'm in Missouri anymore, but have entered a strange world where everything is just a half bubble out of plumb.
Each day brings changes: social distancing, sheltering in place, self-quarantine, businesses closing, and the stock market changing at warp speed.
After the Alzheimer's forum was cancelled, I thought I'd be able to go with the family band to play at the nursing homes.
The first home cancelled because of the flu.
Shortly after our first practice, all nursing homes were on lockdown--no visitors or volunteers.
I can't help but think how stressful it would have been for me if I hadn't been able to see Jim when he was in long-term care.
When anyone asked me why I did things for him that the nursing home should have been doing, I had to admit that it was for my own peace of mind.
It helped me to know that he was fed, dry, and clean.
Jim was like a part of me.
He became dependent on me to see about his well-being.
When he could no longer remember our life together, his memories lived with mine in my heart.
Looking back I see how crazy it was for us to get married when we did.
Jim had to finish his tour in Vietnam.
Then, he was stationed at Ft. Riley for a year.
We lived in Manhattan, Kansas, in a one-room apartment.
Yes, one room, not one bedroom.
We had no air-conditioning and it must have been one of the hottest summers in history.
Before Eric was born, we moved to a bigger apartment in the same house.
The point I'm getting at is that we barely had enough money to live on.
We paid our rent and utilities and carefully shopped for a month's worth of groceries.
After Jim got out of the service, we lived below the poverty level until I went to work at the Rural Electric Cooperative ten years later.
We went through some hard times, but we always managed to have money in a savings account for even harder times.
Jim could keep any old car running and he could fix anything.
If the washing machine broke down, no problem.
We had family, we had love, and that's what makes a person's heart wealthy.
So yeah, a lot of people are going to face some tough times.
My 401k is taking a major hit right now, but just like the last recession--if worse comes to worse, I'm not afraid.
I've been poor before and living through that time is what makes me, me.
The economy doesn't scare me for myself.
I do worry about those who have never known how to budget, how to wear the same clothes and shoes for several years, or how to plan a healthy meal with limited funds.
I hurt for the kids who depended on school for their only meals.
I hope that we work together as decent human beings to change the trajectory of this virus.
When we come out on the other side, more people are going to learn that hard times make us stronger.
When life, as well as our calendars, is decluttered, we will rediscover the worth of simpler times.
Copyright (c) March 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 16, 2020>
"I have something important to say," I said to my husband.
He got a worried look on his face with this preface to an announcement.
We had been talking about COVID-19 so he may have thought I had a fever.
"What's that?" he asked, cautiously.
"I love you," I said, thinking that we just didn't say it enough.
"I have something important to say too," he said.
I smiled in anticipation of words of love.
"You snore." He then proceeded to tell me he had spent several hours in the living room watching TV and eventually catching some ZZZs.
Life has certainly changed over the past few weeks.
We Americans are used to going where we want and socializing often.
Now to stem COVID-19, we are spending more alone time than ever.
The first indication that things were getting serious in my world was the cancellation of the Alzheimer's Impact Movement (AIM) in DC.
My mom and my husband had both tried to talk  me out of going to DC and were thankful the decision had been taken out of my hands.
I spent a day cancelling hotel rooms and plane tickets.
To stop the spread of  COVID-19, we as a nation and as individuals are taking extreme action.
People have been placed in quarantine, and what is considered a large group has shrunk from over 1,000 to 50.
It's not easy or inexpensive to shut down venues, concerts, schools, after school activities, professional sporting events, and to hang out the CLOSED sign on restaurants, small businesses, and physical therapy clinics.
Today, our pastor announced our church would be closed for deep cleaning and they have postponed other activities.
The next Sedalia Business Women's meeting has beens cancelled, and other upcoming meetings will probably be cancelled too.
Personally, I've been in a funk and can't seem to get motivated to do much of anything.
Lack of sleep and not going and doing as usual, has zapped my enthusiasm.
I have something important to say:  Although the AIM Forum has been cancelled, advocacy work must go on.
*         Approximately 5.8 million Americans have Alzheimer's disease.
Presently, there is no cure or effective treatment for Alzheimer's.
This is why research funding is so important!
*         In 2019, unpaid caregivers provided 18.6 billion hours of care for people with Alzheimer's, at a value of $244 billion.
*         Two-thirds of Americans with Alzheimer's are women *         Two-thirds of dementia caregivers are women.
Thirty percent are older than 65.
Only 10% are caregivers for their spouse while over half provide care for a parent or in-law.
I have some upcoming telephone conferences, and possibly video conferences.
I dread video because that means I should fix my hair and put on makeup.
That's been optional for a while.
The only place I've been lately was to practice music at my brother's house.
We've decided to have more jam sessions while we wait for the nursing homes to open their doors to volunteers.
I just need to keep reminding myself that there's still work to be done and, eventually, life will get back to normal.
When my husband left home the day of our conversation, I asked him, "Don't you have anything important to say?" "I love you," he promptly replied.
"I love you," I said, "but you snore too!"  Copyright (c) March 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 5, 2020>
On Memory Day, March 4, at the Missouri State Capitol, advocates from across the state spoke with their legislators about establishing the Missouri Alzheimer's State Plan Taskforce, fund Alzheimer's grants for respite, and to Build a Dementia-Capable Workforce.
After our visits, we gather in rotunda for a Memory Day Ceremony.
This year, I was asked to share some of my thoughts as an advocate.
Here are my thoughts: My Fellow advocates,  Some of you have been Alzheimer's advocates for years, and for some of you this is your first time.
For you who are first-timers, I have to warn you--advocacy gets into your blood.
Each of us has a story that brings us to Capitol Hill.
The pinwheel flower shows your connection to the disease.
I always select a purple flower because I have lost a loved one.
My husband Jim developed dementia at 49 years old.
For the next ten years, the disease stole him away from me, his sons, and his grandchildren.
He never met his youngest grandson.
Caregiving for a loved one with Alzheimer's is on-the-job training for a job that you never wanted to do.
From the time you wake up in the morning, until you wake up again the next morning, you are on-the-job.
When Jim lived at home, I averaged about four hours sleep each night--and not always consecutive hours.
I was in my forties and worked fulltime.
I was lucky to have an abundance of family support.
Jim's mom, his sisters, my mom and my sisters, our sons and daughters-in-law all pitched in to keep him at home for as long as we could.
No matter how hard we tried to keep him safe, Jim kept wandering off.
When I made the heartbreaking decision to put Jim in long-term care, I never relinquished my role as his primary caregiver.
My daily routine was to feed him, toilet him, and bathe him.
It is safe to say that Jim had more family members dropping by the home than any other resident.
Becoming an advocate gave me power over a disease that made me feel powerless.
I've been an advocate on the state and national levels for two decades.
When more than 1,000 Alzheimer's advocates wearing purple sashes storm our nation's capitol, everyone notices!
We hear "thank yous" and stories from passersby.
We hear "go-get-'em" and "God bless you."  An important part of being an advocate is building relationships with your senators and representative.
That does not happen with one visit a year--it happens through district visits, mobile offices, emails, thank you notes, phone calls, using social media, and letters to the editor.
One of the best things I did was to join AIM, the Alzheimer's Impact Movement.
AIM provides the tools to make me the best advocate I can be.
Don't let your advocacy for 2020 end here today; let it be a beginning.
Take the power you have as an individual and become passionate about legislation that improves quality of life for persons with the disease and their caregivers.
Let's work together to end Alzheimer's before our target date of 2025.
Know that your voice is powerful, and you, individually, and all of you collectively can make a difference.
As an advocate, I do not vote red or blue, I vote purple.
Being an advocate is not just what I do; it is what I am.
Copyright (c) March 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 29, 2020>
Have you ever thought about how life is a story and although you are the main character, you have a full cast of supporting characters?
As your supporting characters move in and out of your life, they shift your trajectory, sometimes slightly, but other times turning it into a new direction.
Our heroes (unless they fall from grace) affect us positively and put us on an upward course.
The villains, sometimes disguised as friends, can sink us to abject misery.
Of course, there are walk-on characters who are so unimportant that they don't make any impressions.
Occasionally, these casual passersby will play a pivotal role in your story.
In all good stories, you need a romantic lead.
Of course, that would be Jim.
He had so many characteristics that made him perfect for the role.
Our backgrounds were similar in some ways and polar opposites in others.
We were both from big musical families, but I had lived in one house throughout my entire childhood, Jim had lived in several states and numerous houses--or even under bridges and under trees.
Jim was intelligent, musically talented, generous to a fault, highly principled, honest, and had a big heart.
Our story took a Nicholas Sparks turn, ending with a flood of tears and sadness.
Jim was the character in my story that taught me that love could endure through good times and bad.
Jim's life, dementia, and his death catapulted my story into a different genre.
I had been living a dull, routine life: waking up, going to work, spending my evenings at home doing a few chores, watching some TV, reading my book, sleeping, repeat, repeat, repeat.
I literally walked into a new chapter of my life when Jim and I went to our first Memory Walk on a hot September day in 1998.
And there, I met a feisty seventy-some-year-old ball of fire named Helen Hanneford.
As we proceeded to walk from Liberty Park to the downtown area, Helen would occasionally blow her hunting horn.
We walked into the VFW and a man told her if she would blow her horn, they would take up a collection.
She was happy to oblige.
I only saw her one other time, but I never forgot her.
I opened our local newspaper earlier this month and read a death notice for Helen Hanneford, Slater.
She passed away at age 93 on January 30, 2020, at her home.
Yes, I would just imagine she still lived at home and occasionally blew that hunting horn.
Helen was the character who taught me that volunteering could be joyful.
Being a part of the Alzheimer's Walk community of volunteers brought another inspiring character into my world, Ted Distler.
Ours began as a friendly rivalry--Sedalia Walk VS Jefferson City Walk, but rivalry aside we wholeheartedly supported each other's fundraisers and walks.
Ted was one of those guys who always had a joke, a hearty laugh, and hugs for his friends.
Ted was in survival mode as he cared for the love of his life who had Alzheimer's.
We talked on the phone frequently as we kept abreast of how things were going in our separate lives.
Ted and I would occasionally "meet in the middle" for breakfast and conversation.
"Have you seen that movie The Notebook?" he asked me one time.
I told him I had--another one of those sad Nicholas Sparks' stories.
"I hope it's that way for Norma and me," he said.
He wanted them to die at the same time, so he wouldn't have to know life without her.
As his story ended, he passed away a short time before his beloved wife.
He came close to the Notebook ending he wanted.
Ted was the character that taught me to treasure my friends because they leave a gaping hole in our lives once they are gone.
In 2001, I became an advocate on the national level.
At my first Alzheimer's Forum in DC, I met Jane, Kathy, and Sarah.
I immediately felt a connection to these three women unlike any friendship I had ever had in my life.
Our individual journeys connected into a shared journey.
We are truly sisters of the heart.
Each year, our secret radar allows us to find each other quickly in the crowd of more than 1,000 advocates--all dressed in purple.
It seems that we can pick up our conversations from the previous year almost in mid-sentence.
These three characters have taught me that the closest friends can live the farthest away.
Life just wouldn't be a story without all of the amazing characters who walk in and out of our lives.
Copyright (c) February 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 25, 2020>
To meditate you are supposed to empty your mind and concentrate on breathing.
My internal conversation goes something like this: Breathe in...what should I fix for supper?
I need to pick up a loaf of bread...breathe out...did I lock my car?
I really need to print those forms.
I've never had any luck emptying my mind.
It just doesn't work for me because my brain never shuts down its internal conversation.
Our internal voices are where we find the motivation to become a voice, or an advocate.
The motivation to be an advocate for a cause you believe in comes from the inside out.
Seeing the devastation dementia had on Jim was motivation enough for me.
My first introduction to advocacy was at the Alzheimer's forum in 2001.
Those first few years, we had to educate our legislators about the devastation of Alzheimer's and related dementia.
Eventually, everyone knew about Alzheimer's, either from us or from personal experience.
Over the years, we advocates have become better trained and well organized under the guidance of the Alzheimer's Impact Movement (AIM).
This year I'll be making my twentieth trip to DC to visit with my senators and my representative, Congresswoman Vicky Hartzler.
In preparation for the DC trip, Jessica Snell, Jerry Dowell, and I met with her field representative Rachel Gilroy and District Director Austin Kramer.
We discussed AIM's federal priorities: 1)      An Additional $354 Million for Alzheimer's Research.
We are still playing catch up with Alzheimer's research funding at NIH after being woefully underfunded for more than a decade.
Our only hope of staving off a devastating blow to Medicare and Medicaid is to find effective treatment or a cure.
On a personal level, I don't want anyone to go through the heartbreak of dementia.
2)      An Additional $20 Million for the BOLD Infrastructure Act.
The BOLD Act uses the traditional tools and techniques of public health to fight Alzheimer's on a local level.
Alzheimer's Centers of Excellence will be established across the country.
Local health departments can implement interventions to help with early diagnosis, promoting healthy lifestyles to reduce risk, and data collection.
The Act also strengthens the role of the CDC as they lead public health efforts and provide funding on the state level.
3)      Younger-Onset Alzheimer's Disease Act (S.901/H.R.1903).
Persons with younger-onset dementia do not have access to the same support and services as Americans aged 60 and older.
Jim was only 49, so we were turned down when we asked for help through the Division of Aging.
The Older Americans Act (OAA) reauthorization includes giving access to these services to persons with dementia regardless of age, extends the RAISE Family Caregivers Act from three to four years, and includes elements of the Supporting America's Families and Caregivers Act.
These successes are largely because of the thousands of dedicated Alzheimer's Advocates who don purple sashes and visit Capitol Hill annually.
As Congresswoman Hartzler's ambassador, I was pleased that she was one of the co-sponsors.
4)      Improving HOPE for Alzheimer's Act (S.880/H.R.1873).
In 2017, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services allowed clinicians to be reimbursed for providing care planning for cognitively impaired individuals.
As most of us who have had a loved one with dementia know, care planning is a vital part of improving quality of life.
However, few people knew about care planning for dementia and the service was not widely used.
The Improving HOPE Act would require Health and Human Services to educate clinicians on the service and report the barriers keeping individuals from using care planning.
Our role as advocates will be to seek co-sponsors.
Do you want to be a voice for Alzheimer's?
You don't have to go to Capitol Hill to have your voice heard.
One of the ways you can lend support is to join the Alzheimer's Impact Movement at Alzimpact.org ($20).
You will receive updates and the online tools will make advocacy easy.
During the AIM Forum, we use an app to keep you updated on the message we are taking to our legislators.
You can pick up your phone, text, use Facebook or Twitter to add your voice to ours.
If enough people whisper the same message, it is much more effective than when one person shouts.
Copyright (c) February 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 12, 2020>
Recently, I've been thinking about how our lowest moments give us the opportunity to rise from the ashes.
We can emerge as something new from something that has been destroyed.
I helped celebrate the first service at our new church building.
The historic church was destroyed by fire in 2016.
Unable to rebuild in the same location, a new site was chosen for a new "traditional" church.
Through faith and hope, a beautiful structure metaphorically rose from the ashes.
I can't think of anyone who hasn't felt his or her world is in a shambles from time to time.
When someone receives a terminal diagnosis, they feel the burden of ashes.
It takes determination and optimism to rise above the ashes and continue living.
I have seen amazing people who have received a diagnosis of Alzheimer's and immediately kicked into action to advocate for research dollars.
Often, these advocates are aware that should a treatment be discovered, it would be too late for them.
Chronic disease creates a heap of ashes.
Dealing with pain every day, wears a person down.
Arthritis can make every joint in your body ache, and make movement a challenge.
Especially, when a disease has no cure, and you know your health is only going to worsen and never get better.
It is hard to see a loved one suffer, and it can foster a feeling of hopelessness and helplessness, if you let it.
Life can change in a heartbeat.
Couples marry.
Babies are born.
We can feel so blessed at times, and at other times wonder where it all went wrong.
Life is full of surprises, and a rollercoaster of separations and reunions.
When death separates us from those we love desperately, it takes fortitude to overcome the sorrow.
There is no time limit on grief.
The trick is to build on the ashes instead of being buried beneath them.
It's a lot of hard work to wallow in self-pity and sorrow.
Life is certainly more enjoyable when we concentrate on the good times and not the sad times.
When I think about ashes, I think about campfires.
That makes me think about Colorado and the Rocky Mountains.
I think about early morning coffee, breakfast cooked on the camp stove, hiking, and animal watching.
The memories are like a thousand wings lifting my spirits on the dreariest and saddest days.
As long as I walk this earth, I hope to rise from the ashes of loss by appreciating what I still have.
Life will be what I make of it, not what it makes of me.
Copyright (c) February 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 31, 2020>
Sometimes we refer to the indispensable people who support our work as a "right hand." I have been called a "right hand" and have had people who served as my "right hand." In addition to the metaphorical right hand, those of us who are right-handed have a physical right hand that we count on for many tasks: typing, writing, removing medicine bottle lids, etc.
The uses for our right hand are endless.
The Alzheimer's type of disease Jim had (corticobasal ganglionic degeneration) caused a symptom known as alien limb.
In Jim's case, the limb involved the right arm.
He eventually quit using his right hand and it was clutched into a fist.
Although we used every technique we could, his hand became infected and his little finger had to be amputated.
Jim had lost his ability to play the guitar, but still it comforted me that the hand he used to fret the guitar was still usable.
Problems with hands was brought to the forefront of my attention when I began to have difficulties with my right hand.
Each morning, I'd have to work out the kinks before my hand was useful.
I kept thinking that the problems would go away, so I limited activities that left my hand curled up and in pain.
I took ibuprofen and toughed it out for a few months.
Then, my ring finger curled down, and when I tried to straighten it, it snapped into place.
My family doctor sent me to an orthopedic specialist.
After x-rays, I found out that more was wrong than right about my hand.
He reeled off the problems: trigger finger, bone spurs, arthritis, ganglion cysts, and carpal tunnel disease.
"I'll give you a cortisone shot," he said.
"It about 48 percent of the time." Okay, I was game.
He sprayed the palm of my hand and injected the cortisone.
"Ouch!" I was not prepared for the pain.
"That hurt a lot worse than the shots in my knees," If my hand could have talked, it would have been screaming.
"You have more nerves in your hand," he explained.
No, joke.
Not being a medical professional, I had not considered that.
He put a carpal tunnel brace on my wrist.
"You need to wear this when you sleep and when you drive long distances." After discussion of what constituted long distances, I told him I traveled that far five times a month.
Our family band practiced two times a month and we played at nursing homes another three days a month.
"I bet they really enjoy that," he said.
"What instrument do you play?"  "Ukulele," I said.
I told him that reluctantly I had started singing.
He wanted to know what I sang.
I explained we sang a variety of genres and that one of my favorites was "Cowboy's Sweetheart." "Do you yodel?" he asked.
I shouldn't have been surprised that a cowboy poet would recognize Patsy Montana's old time hit.
I explained that I only yodeled at the end of the song.
"Yodel for me!" he said.
I gave a brief yodel, and it brought a big smile to his face.
Guess I can mark yodeling in a doctor's office off my bucket list.
As for the hand, for the first three days I thought I'd made a bad, bad mistake.
Then, like magic, it's a whole lot better.
Makes me feel like yodeling just for the heck of it.
Copyright (c) January 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 23, 2020>
We have entered the year of perfect vision: 2020.
This is a year of cautionary notes, specifically not to shorten the year to 20 on checks or legal documents.
It makes perfect sense since the date could be changed to 20 whatever.
I'm sure that when I was a kid that the magically sounding year of 2020 seemed so far in the future as to not be on my radar.
In fact, the thought of 20/20 vision wasn't on my radar either.
I'm not sure what happened, but I lost my ability to see so slowly that I never even noticed it until I was in 7th grade.
That year, our teacher for some crazy reason didn't want us to work the problems in our math book so she wrote different problems on the blackboard.
I could see she was writing on the board, but couldn't make out the numbers.
Eventually, another student and I sat at the teacher's desk so that we could read the problems.
That summer, I got my first pair of glasses.
The optometrist, a wise old man, said he was not going to correct my vision to 20/20.
"You have gotten so used to not seeing that you quit trying." Sure enough, when I went back two weeks later, my corrected vision was 20/20.
I can remember being amazed that it was possible to see individual leaves on the trees.
Our eyes open up the world around us and allow us to see both the beautiful and ugly.
Paulo Coelho said, "The eyes are the mirror of the soul and reflect everything that seems to be hidden; and like a mirror they also reflect the person looking into them."  Eyes Show Emotion: Eyes are our most expressive facial feature.
Before I had my glasses, I squinted a lot.
Why?
Narrowing the eyes helps us focus and see more details.
Narrowed eyes are often associated with discrimination, disgust, and suspicion.
Wide eyes are associated with fear or awe.
Eyes Reflect Mood: If you are sad, it shows in your eyes.
Happiness can cause a twinkle in your eye.
Eyes are the outward mirror of the inward self.
Eyes can be angry.
They can be filled with pity, empathy, or love.
They can show exasperation--eye roll.
Even if we hold the rest of our face still, eyes can tell on us.
Eyes Are a Clue to Truthfulness: Studies show that the eyes can reveal thinking, lying, or being honest.
If you close your eyes when you are conversing with someone, you may either be taking a short nap (because they are boring), or you may be connecting with your inner self.
Psychologists say that if a person looks up and to the right, they are lying.
However, if you look up and to the left, you are as honest as Abe.
Theoretically.
I can't help but think that a habitual liar will look you straight into your eyes and fabricate away.
Don't you think they read too?
Eyes Indicate Physical Health: Diabetes, stress, heart problems, kidney disease, high blood pressure, and retinal detachment can cause changes in your vision.
Sudden blurry vision could indicate a migraine or a stroke.
Grave's disease can cause bulging eyes.
We've hear of ring around the collar (old commercial for those of you under forty), but if you are under forty and have a ring around your cornea, you should have your cholesterol checked.
If the whites of your eyes turn yellow (jaundice), you could have liver problems.
Twitching eyelids could be from stress, too much caffeine, MS, or as I have personally noticed--lack of sleep.
And, of course, red teary eyes could be from allergies.
Can a Simple Eye Test Detect Alzheimer's?
Studies indicate that changes in the blood vessels in the retina appear to be linked to dementia.
By using optical coherence tomography angiograpy (Octa),  researchers at Duke University, North Carolina, compared the retinas of 39 people with Alzheimer's and 37 who had mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to 133 people with no brain impairment.
They discovered that people with Alzheimer's had fewer blood vessels and reduced blood flow the other two groups.
Both the people with MCI and Alzheimer's had a thinner layer of nerve fibers that surround the optic nerve.
The study was small, and so far, the eye test to detect Alzheimer's isn't simple, or available at this time.
When it comes to noting the motives, truthfulness, moods, and health of those around you, look into their eyes.
The next time you look in the mirror, examine your own eyes for anything new or different.
For many reasons, the eyes have it.
Copyright (c) January 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ https://www.nhs.uk/news/neurology/eye-test-can-pick-alzheimers-study-claims/
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 11, 2020>
As I was putting away my Christmas decorations, I wondered why it seemed to take twice as long to undecorate as it does to decorate.
Stuff to tumble around in my mind.
And I've often wondered why it takes so much longer to drive to a vacation destination that it does to get home.
I know that when my mom, sisters, and I go on our girls' trip, we often make side trips on the way to see special places.
Once we head home, we generally make a beeline.
That partially explains how that works, but I've noticed that trips to Kansas City or St. Louis seem the same with no sightseeing along the way.
Is it because we feel we are "almost home" when we get into familiar territory?
Stuff that makes me think: How can people raised under the same circumstances look at the world so differently?
Why do some members of the same family have different prejudices, political leanings, and different standards of morality?
More stuff ... Why do some good people die young, while lowlifes live to a ripe old age?
Why do children have cancer?
Why do some people lose everything through no fault of their own, while others have the Midas touch?
Why are lives disrupted by horrible diseases like Alzheimer's?
How could a person who had many talents, intelligence, and a wacky sense of humor lose it all due to a disease that scattered plaques and tangles throughout the brain?
How could Jim lose his ability to play his guitar and sing, when that had been a major part of his life since childhood?
Why do some of us think about everything and wonder why life is as it is, instead of its full potential?
Yet, others waste no thought on abstract ideas?
Why do some of us see ourselves as a small piece of a puzzle, and others believe they are the puzzle maker?
I wonder why some of us are empathetic to the less fortunate, and others care only about "they selves" as a country song says.
Are narcissists and sociopaths more common, or do we just realize that's what they are now?
As I've gotten older, I notice that time manages me instead of me managing time.
I used to try to get things done as soon as possible, but now it seems that I won't do today what can be put off until tomorrow.
When Jim was in the nursing home, people often asked me how I managed to work fulltime, take care of Jim every day, get a college degree, and volunteer for the Alzheimer's Association.
Could I have had magically had more time then than I do now?
Sometimes, thinking about stuff can make me tired.
The good news is that my mind is still working.
The bad news is that the rest of my body is having a hard time keeping up with the thoughts and ideas flowing through the neurotransmitters of my brain.
Copyright (c) January 2020 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 30, 2019>
It's hard to think that another year is nearing the end.
I shouldn't be surprised since time seems to pass by faster and faster each day.
Sometimes I feel like time is a runaway train, and I'm barely hanging onto the caboose.
On Christmas day, I was walking my dog and reflecting on Christmases past.
For some reason, a memory popped up out of the blue that hadn't crossed my mind for years.
I was thinking about how Jim didn't enjoy all the Christmas brouhaha.
In his mind, Christmas had lost its true meaning as it became more commercialized and more pressure to buy gifts.
Jim's family decided to exchange names one year, and Jim didn't want any part of it.
Anyway, I participated, never suspecting what my gift was going to be.
Jim's Grandpa Tubbs drew my name, and you'll have to admit the man had a sense of humor.
He watched expectedly as I opened my gift.
He had given me an orange, transparent negligee.
I'm not sure my red face went too well with the orange!
My dog thought I was a little bit crazy when I started laughing out loud, but I found a lot of humor in remembering that unusual gift.
This time of year, we tend to reflect on the year in review--or sometimes, a lifetime in review.
Each year has its challenges, tragedies, and triumphs.
Families grow and families shrink.
Our circle of friends and supporters may increase, or they may fade away.
Sometimes, when we are spreading the merry and bright messages, the words of cheer only serve to bring out the sadness of the holidays.
For those who are missing their loved ones or have health problems, the holidays can be an endurance test.
Enduring and enjoying are worlds apart.
In many ways, I'm in a better place than I was this time last year, but in other ways, this year has brought a new set of troubles.
All I can say is while bad things occurred this year, I feel that if I kept score, I'd find that more good things happened.
A lot of people make resolutions this time of the year.
I never found a resolution that I couldn't break within a week.
If I were to look at the year ahead and decide what I would like to see change, I can think of one obvious thing.
I'd like to spend more time playing and less time working.
It's not unusual for me to spend an entire day without a chance to sit down--and when I sit down, I'm often at my computer working on one project or another.
A goal I set last year was to get more sleep.
Well, that hasn't worked out.
I stay up until midnight, day after day, and then often wake before the alarm goes off.
To top it all off, if I have one good night's sleep, I have another that is restless.
I believe this is a left over from the days when Jim wandered at night.
The doctor finally gave him a sleeping pill, but that only worked for about four hours.
Then, we were both up, Jim trying to leave, and me determined to make him stay.
Living human beings are survivors.
We each have fought our own battles, suffered unbearable losses, and picked ourselves up and dusted off despair.
We relegate the hurt to a special part of our brains and go about the business of surviving.
As time passes by, living life to the fullest is the best way to honor our loved ones who are no longer with us.
I hope that while I hang on to the runaway train of time, I open my eyes and enjoy the glorious view for I will never pass this way again.
Copyright (c) December 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 20, 2019>
Fifty years ago today, Jim and I were married in a tiny chapel on Fort DeRussy in Honolulu, Hawaii.
This whole marriage thing was quite the adventure.
Jim had been in Vietnam eight months and was due for R&R.
He floated the idea that he could take R&R in Hawaii and we could get married.
Once he got the approval, the only obstacle was money.
I was a college student, and Jim had been sending his check to his mom and dad who were in dire financial straits.
Never to be deterred, Jim took what little money he had and won enough at craps game to buy my ticket and reserve a hotel room at the Ilikai.
I set off to Hawaii on a cold December day after just reading the book Airport.
While waiting to board the plane I joked with my mom and dad about which of the passengers looked like a bomber.
Well, the joke was on me when we made an emergency landing in Denver.
Of course, they didn't even tell us we were landing, but it became obvious as the ground got closer and closer.
We landed on an apparently abandoned runway being followed by fire trucks, police cars, ambulances, and taxis.
After spending several hours in a hanger, they finally told us that someone had called in a bomb threat for our flight.
They put us on a different plane and sent us on our way.
When our flight got to San Francisco, we flew in circles for an hour above a thunderstorm until we were cleared to land.
My connecting flight was long gone.
I sat in the airport for the rest of the day waiting for a plane delayed by a snowstorm in New York.
Jim and I were supposed to get married on Friday, December 19, but it was late at night before I made it to Hawaii.
The next day, we took a taxi up into the mountains to get our marriage license.
Except, my family doctor used a form for my blood test that had additional information on it, but he only filled out the part required in Missouri.
It had all the info needed in Hawaii, but she couldn't accept an incomplete form.
Her husband drove us to a clinic in downtown Honolulu that transferred the info to a Hawaiian form.
Then, we went back to the mountains to get the license.
Guess what?
The chapel closed at noon and we couldn't make it back in time.
Jim used his persuasive line of gab to get the chaplain to wait for us.
When we came rushing through the door at one o'clock and handed him the license, he had his employees witness our signatures and excused them to go home.
I had never dreamed of a big wedding, but I certainly never thought I'd have a wedding with three people, including me and the groom!
Fifty years ago today, started the life that was to be mine for thirty-five years.
We lived in poverty for several years, but eventually had a decent income.
We had ups and downs, fights and abundant love.
We had a lot of years of "sickness" and not too many of health.
I can't say I wouldn't have changed a thing, because I'd have definitely changed Jim's mental and physical health, and would have skipped the dementia part completely.
Still, the family that I love dearly today is possible because a couple of kids, who against all odds, got married on this day in 1969.
Smiles to heaven, Jim.
I am a much better person for having known your wholehearted love and loving you to the moon and back.
Copyright (c) December 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 18, 2019>
I read recently that everyone has a favorite burner on the stove, but don't talk about it.
Not only do we have a favorite burner, we have a favorite skillet.
In fact, we can't seem to fix breakfast without that skillet.
A few weeks ago, I inhaled a few cups of coffee and prepared to fix breakfast.
I opened the cabinet to drag out "the" skillet, and although the shelf had other skillets, it didn't have the breakfast skillet.
I picked up the larger skillets, as if the smaller one could be hiding beneath them.
But no, it wasn't there.
Breakfast was on hold while the search is on.
It seems that more and more objects have been disappearing lately.
Makes me wonder if poltergeists are playing tricks on us.
Missing, missing, missing.
After a thorough search of the kitchen, I found the skillet--not in the normal place, but in with the pots.
"You're losing it," my husband said.
That was before he tore up his office  looking for two expensive missing program discs.
Which, I might add are missing to this day.
"At least it wasn't in the refrigerator," I defended myself.
I remember that misplacing items are a sign of normal aging if you find it in a halfway logical place.
If you find it in a really weird place, it might be Warning Sign #7 that you might have Alzheimer's.
I can just tick off the missing: gloves, coats, favorite shirts, sock mates, my seasonal clothing, lids for storage bowls, and just this morning a container of fruit.
I had just fixed the fruit and couldn't figure out what I had done with it.
After a search, I found it on the bathroom counter where I had gone to turn off hubby's razor that he left running.
Ok. Now, I admit that (a) that wasn't a logical place for the container of fruit, but (b) I was able to retrace my steps.
Score one for me, (a) is a sign of Alzheimer's, but (b) is normal aging.
I call that a wash, wouldn't you?
I've discovered there is a rule of lost and found.
All you have to do is replace an item to find the original you lost.
I lost my nail clippers--well, more like several clippers--but I lost my last ones.
I need to keep my nails clipped to play my ukulele.
I was on my way to practice our program for the nursing homes, so I stopped at Dollar General to buy nail clippers.
Of course, a few days later, I found a nice (gold plated) set of clippers in a drawer.
The lost is usually found--eventually--even if you can't retrace your steps.
Last year, I could only find my ugly Christmas sweater, but this year, I found the rest of my Christmas sweaters in a downstairs closet.
My husband had the serial numbers for his two programs so he was able to get electronic copies to put on his new PC.
As for the original programs, maybe I should check the freezer.
Copyright (c) December 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ  
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 18, 2019>
When Jim developed dementia, one of the things I missed the most was our conversations.
No matter what the daily schedule, we always took time to drink a cup of coffee and talk.
Most of the time, our first cup of coffee was in bed propped up on our pillows.
Our first indication that Jim had dementia was the day he couldn't remember his social security number or his birth date.
To forget any date, much less his birth date, set off the alarms in my head.
At first, he still looked and sounded the same.
As time passed, he became vague in his speech and searched for words for common objects.
He often became frustrated when he couldn't communicate.
Gradually, our conversations became less meaningful until after a few years, Jim developed aphasia and became mostly nonverbal.
He used what I refer to as "stock" phrases.
Some of his favorites were "right here, but I can't find it" or "I have no idea" or "is that right?" and "you're going the wrong way." I saw him have conversations with strangers, and he inserted enough "is that right's" that the person had no idea that Jim had dementia.
After you are around someone with dementia, you are more attuned to the language changes that indicate an underlying neurodegenerative disorder.
Subtle changes in speech may occur up to a decade before the onset of dementia, or as in Jim's case, a short time.
Researchers are using speech patterns as a way to identify at risk individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and those who are in the earliest stages of dementia.
1.
Rambling and Non-specific Speech.
People with MCI may use more words than necessary when they speak.
Individuals in the early stages of dementia will have trouble finding the correct words, talk in simplified sentences, and make more grammatical errors than normal.
Word finding may lead to calling objects by the wrong name, for example calling an apple an "orange." It can also lead to a lengthy description instead of a word.
When they can't recall the word "book," they may say, "You know, that thing with words and those things you turn..."  2.
Formulaic Speech.
Formulaic speech is a more scientific version of what I referred to earlier as Jim's "stock" phrases.
Using a lot of common phrases repetitively such as "you know what I mean" when a person cannot express what he or she is trying to say.
3.
Weak Language.
A person with dementia may start to speak in fragmented sentences and not finish complete thoughts.
They stop using less common words and use fewer meaningful adverbs or adjectives.
4.
Not Understanding Written Language.
Along with speech problems, persons with cognitive problems may have trouble reading.
They might be able to recite written words, or even read a book, but not fully understand what they have read.
Jim was a prolific reader and we were regulars at our local independent bookstore.
I began to notice that Jim sometimes bought a duplicate or triplicate of the same book.
He was reading, turning the pages, but he couldn't follow the storyline.
5.
Unusually Rude Speech.
As language skills erode, frustration can make a person with dementia rude.
If the part of the brain is damaged that filters thoughts from being spoken aloud, the brain doesn't censor what comes out of the mouth.
After Jim quit smoking and stores relegated smokers to benches near the entrance of the store, Jim would shake his finger at complete strangers and say, "You better quit that damn smoking." 6.
Repetitive questions.
Individuals with dementia often use repetitive phrases or ask the same question multiple times.
When short term memory is affected, they may not realize they are repeating themselves.
As annoying as it is, it is best to validate the person with an acknowledgement they have spoken.
The stage of dementia and the type of dementia affects communication to different degrees and in different ways.
It is sad that a degenerative brain disease can so adversely affect a person who was once highly intelligent and a great conversationalist.
When I watch old videotapes of Jim, I realize how much I missed his jokes, observations, and singing during the last several years of his life.
But most of all, I missed our conversations over our morning coffee.
Copyright (c) November 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 5, 2019>
When I was a kid, someone gave us a set of the World Book of Knowledge.
I was always looking for something to read and found the books much more interesting than the backs of cereal boxes.
Although the books were full of history, science, and various other subjects for school age children, I always started (and usually ended) with the literature section in the middle.
The literature section had stories and poems.
I memorized dozens of poems and one came in handy this month.
I made an appointment and recited, "Remember, remember the fifth of November." I knew I had said that twice.
Unfortunately, I couldn't recall what I was going to remember.
When I flipped the wall calendar to the new month, the fifth of November was a blank square.
My PC was downstairs in the safe, and my phone had a dead battery.
I puzzled over the situation.
I knew it was about time for my hair appointment, and sure enough when the battery came to life--there it was.
This morning when I turned on my PC, I saw the other reminder.
I can now get my second pneumonia shot.
Well, I didn't rush into get my shot, but I kept the hair appointment.
Rhyming poetry is a good way to memorize information.
It's how I used to remember how many days were in each month until I worked for more than thirty years plugging in the last day of the month for our reports.
I no longer had to say, "Thirty days has September, April, June, and November..."  Then there's the "i" before "e" poem, although that one is pretty worthless because of all the exceptions.
Being able to remember important events is something all of us strive to do.
Life can get so busy at times, that I often think of events after it's too late.
My phone does its best to remind me of everything I need to do.
I even have my grocery list on it.
I'm not sure how reliable my memory is without all the bells and whistles of my electronic calendars.
Being forgetful is something that concerns me.
Alzheimer's scares me more than any other disease.
I shudder to think that an irreversible, progressive disease could erode my skills, erase my memories, and thrust me into a world of confusion.
I can't imagine anything sadder than not recognizing my grandchildren.
If I lost the ability to read or write, it would change who I am as a person.
With Jim, the thing I hated the most was that we had to place him in a Special Care Unit.
He was locked inside, and it hurt my heart that he lost the freedom he had risked his life for in Vietnam.
That Jim spent the last decade of his life in a faraway place is one of life's unexplained mysteries.
Bad things should happen to bad people not to good people.
The "Serenity Prayer" encourages us to accept what we cannot change.
I have come to realize that what-ifs and could have beens only steal my joy, and need to be banished forever.
I want to change the things I can, and know that I certainly need wisdom to make that happen.
Copyright (c) November 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 4, 2019>
At church, I sat behind the man who had been our family doctor until he retired in 2012.
As we greeted each other, he said, "I didn't recognize you at first." That should have been my clue to tell him my name, but I didn't get a chance before we started singing.
After all, we had one family doctor and he had hundreds of patients, so that didn't surprise me too much.
It was communion Sunday, and our associate pastor quoted the passage where Jesus said, "Do this in remembrance of me."  As we returned to our seats after communion, doc turned around and said, "Are you still Mrs. Fisher?" "Yes," I said.
"I remarried, but kept my name." "I remember Jimmy," he said.
"Your name is Linda, right?" I nodded.
"It's a shame that you both had to go through that." We finished services with a benediction and our final song.
As we were walking out, he said, "You know, Jimmy won't look the same when we get to heaven, but we will know him." I could feel tears welling in my eyes, and I said, "I know he will be whole again." When I dream of Jim, he doesn't have dementia.
When I think of Jim, I want to remember him as he was before dementia, and sometimes I do.
Sometimes, I think of how life changed so drastically when he began forgetting how to remember.
He had a phenomenal ability to recall memories, or to reminisce, as his brother Bob called it.
It is safe to say that I think of Jim every day.
Sometimes, the thoughts are fleeting and other times they hit me hard.
I've lost other loved ones that I think of often, but not that I think of on a daily basis.
This morning, I was going to town and had some anxious thoughts about what the day was going to bring.
Then, a song came on the radio that immediately took me back to a different time.
The song I was hearing, "Cinderella," made me think of Jim, strumming his guitar, and singing the song to me.
He would sing, "Lindarella." The remembrance made me both sad and happy.
Throughout life, we find moments we'd just as soon forget, but those little snippets of memory can enrich our lives if we let them.
It is our past that makes us who we are today.
Who we are and what we do today will be tomorrow's memories, so we want to make them worthwhile.
Copyright (c) November 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 31, 2019>
Last week some of my friends and I were discussing an article in the paper about a ghost hunter in our town.
"I don't know if as Christians, we should believe that ghosts exist.
Do you believe in ghosts?" she asked me.
"Oh, yes," I said.
I told her a quick story about a "ghost" car that Jim and I had seen on an evening walk many years ago.
I didn't tell her about my many other close encounters with the unexplainable.
It always seems that at Halloween time, the weird and strange seems to be on our minds.
I take special care to avoid creepy things anymore, and try not to call attention to myself when it comes to the paranormal.
My brother and I did write a book a few years ago, Apparitions: Twisted Tales and Yarns, which was mostly fiction.
Anyway, Halloween is just a fun time for me now, with all things calm and normal.
I even bought a pair of Halloween leggings adorned with spider webs.
I completed my outfit with a pair of spider web/spider earrings.
I wore my outfit the day our family band played music for a food drive in our home town.
After we packed away our instruments and said our goodbyes, I headed home.
I was cruising along listening to Prime Country when I noticed a dark spot out of the corner of my eye.
I occasionally have "floaters" and thought this was a particularly bad one.
Then I noticed that it seem to be moving.
I reached up, pulled off my glasses, and my floater turned out to be a spider web stuck to my glasses.
I thought that was a little bit coincidental since I was wearing all my spidery garb.
A few days later, I wore the same outfit to town.
As I was sitting in the left hand turn lane waiting for the light to change, I dialed my mom's number to chat with her on my way home.
She answered the phone at the same moment a mean looking spider crawled across my windshield.
"I have to get this spider out of my car," I said.
My mom had me on speaker and my brother and sister-in-law could hear me.
My sister-in-law told me I should not be talking on the phone while I was driving--much less battling a spider.
"It's hands free," I explained, as I pushed the button to lower the window.
I grabbed a piece of mail off the seat and tried to flip the spider out the window.
Now why would a spider go out the window when he had a gigantic web all over my legs?
Well, he disappeared all right, but I didn't know where he went.
I finally made my left-hand turn and pulled into a parking lot.
I jumped out frantically brushing off my clothes, shaking my hair, examining the car.
He was nowhere to be found.
I don't know what happened to him.
I do know that I had three people laughing at me as I cautiously crawled back into my car.
I guess, I couldn't just abandon my car because a darned spider was hiding out in it--somewhere.
When I think about it, the spider pants seemed to be a spider magnet.
All I can say is I'm glad I chose them over the second choice--ghost pants.
Copyright (c) October 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 11, 2019>
If You Think You're Busy My friend Judy used to say, "If you think you're busy now--retire." At the time, I was working full time, taking care of Jim, volunteering for the Alzheimer's Association, and involved in Writers' Guild.
I thought there was no way that I could possibly be any busier.
Fast forward to now and I don't know how I ever had time to work.
It seems that life should be more laid back in retirement, and I should have plenty of time to read and relax.
Except that I don't.
Reading is usually reserved for bedtime, unless I get to feeling feisty and spend the entire day in my pj's curled up with a book.
Well, I'm sure that's happened at least once since I retired in 2013.
I saw a post a few days ago that said something about instead of making a to-do list, make a to-be list.
It went on to list things that a person might want to be.
Of course, I can't find where I saw it, so the absolute queen of the to-do list--actually multitasking by having several lists going at the same time--I decided to work on my own to-be list.
Some of the things I want to be: Happy.
I'm not talking about telling a joke happy, because even the most depressed people may laugh the loudest at a joke.
I want to feel happiness in my soul, in my being.
I want to wake up each day to the thought that each day gives me new opportunities to achieve my life's goals.
Each day gives me a chance to let go of yesterday's problems or failures.
Appreciative.
I want always to be grateful for time spent with family and friends.
I appreciate that my health, although not perfect, allows me to do most of the things I want to do.
Sure, it hurts my fingers to type, but I can still work for a while before they quit on me.
I want to concentrate on what's working instead of what's gone wrong.
Thoughtful.
Being thoughtful is a two-sided coin.
One side is to be thoughtful of others and never hurt someone's feelings deliberately.
The other side is that I want to think things through before popping off with something that offends others.
I want to think for myself, not be influenced by someone's outrage or political agenda.
I hope that I'm always capable of being introspective and never have a disease that would take that away from me.
A Good Judge of Character.
I want to surround myself with honest, moral humans.
I realize that no one is perfect and they won't always agree with me (even when I'm right), but if they have my back, I'll have theirs.
I can forgive a lot of flaws, but I don't want to waste my time with liars, cheaters, thieves, or con artists.
Able to Laugh.
I have some family and friends who have no sense of humor.
Laughter is good for my mental health.
If I can laugh at myself when I make silly mistakes, it helps me to forgive myself for moments of stupidity.
A Woman Who Makes the Most of Life.
I don't just want to be alive--I want to live.
I realize that time manages me more than I manage it.
I have books to read, places to go, things to do, books to write, and songs to sing.
Yes, I'm busier than a normal human being should be, but it's the lifestyle I've chosen.
I may want long "to-do" lists of tasks, but my "to-be" list stretches to infinity and beyond.
Copyright (c) October 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 24, 2019>
Sometimes I hear a message on Sunday morning that speaks to my heart.
This Sunday, Pastor Candice talked about the book of James.
The gist of the section was we should not brag about tomorrow because we don't know what tomorrow might bring.
I underlined, "You are a mist that appears for a little while and then vanishes." This really puts into perspective how fleeting life is and what a small speck our years here on earth are in the realm of eternity.
So what do we do with our precious time?
We fight.
We argue.
We worry about tomorrow.
We think of ourselves as important--at least in our own little corner of the world.
When I was a little girl, I sometimes wondered if people existed when they weren't where I could see them.
Talk about thinking I was the center of the world!
I don't know at what point in my life I stopped those foolish thoughts.
At least I was a kid.
I know people who think the world revolves around them and they are supposedly all grown up.
The thought that life is but a mist really fits into my line of thought now.
As Dorothy said, when she was in OZ, "My!
People come and go so quickly here." If you think about the people in your life, you will see that like the mist, they sometimes surround you with love and other times they vanish into thin air.
We lose people for a lot of reasons.
Often, the reason is indifference.
They no longer play a relevant part in our lives, and we let them slip away into the mist of the forgotten.
Sometimes, the reason is distance.
Separation can be caused by miles and miles of physical distance, or by the distance of growing apart philosophically or simply from having nothing in common.
Other people we love regardless of how far adrift they are from our everyday lives.
Family ties can transcend any barriers.
Friends are the family we choose.
True friends can practically pick up in the middle of a conversation although they may have not seen each other for months.
When we are separated from our loved ones by death, sometimes we can feel their presence and at times reach out to touch them in our minds, hearts, and dreams.
They are gone, but they are here in a way that can comfort us.
Memories can hit with such force that it takes our breath away.
The mist clears and we find ourselves in another moment, another time, a different dimension.
Life is a mist.
What is important?
I remember one time a woman asked me if I was jealous of my sister because she lived in a new, lovely home.
At the time, Jim and I were renting an old house with sloping floor and ill-fitting windows.
We had old furniture we'd bought from a second hand store.
Still, I thought it sounded like a ridiculous idea.
"No," I said.
"I'm happy for her." And I meant it.
I had zero jealousy or envy.
What is important to me is not to be famous, rich, or have my name remembered by strangers.
I have no desire to be important in worldly ways.
All I want is to fulfill the mission I've been given in life.
I want to give more than I take.
I want to love and to be loved.
I want to know the good I can do and then do it.
I don't want to do it for outward recognition; I want to do it for the way it makes me feel on the inside.
When my mist vanishes, I want my legacy to be a life well lived, and more importantly, a life well loved.
Copyright (c) September 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 19, 2019>
Life has been so hectic the past few weeks that I haven't had time for a fleeting thought, much less rumination.
If I could only find a way to add more hours to the day, it would be helpful.
I guess in a way, I have added more hours.
Unfortunately, the hours are stolen from sleep time.
I've been in the bad habit of going to bed at midnight and due to appointments, conferences, Walk to End Alzheimer's, etc, etc, I've been getting up early, earlier, or earliest.
Lately, if I can't find two things to do at once, I feel like I'm wasting precious time.
I watch TV and play games on my Kindle at the same time.
I walk the dog and practice songs for our nursing home gigs.
I stop on my way to the basement to play a short song on my ukulele.
You get the idea, I'm sure.
Of course, this doubling up can cause chaos at times.
I spilled milk two days in a row.
Once on my PC and the other time all over the counter and (oops) my husband.
Occasionally, I put something in the cabinet that should have gone in the refrigerator, or leave my phone in the living room and pick up the TV remote instead.
Last week, my husband and I mowed our acres of lawn, and I had some quality rumination time while I mowed.
Although, I was exhausted, I decided to use the trimmer, but the battery was dead.
(Darn the luck!)
I put the battery on the charger, took a shower, and a nap.
The next day, I tackled the weeds around our bevy of hydrants.
As I was starting to wear down, I looked at my cell phone to see how long I'd been at it.
As I pulled the phone out of my pocket, it began to play a Carter family song from the early 1950s "It's My Lazy Day." Seriously?
Is that irony, or what?
My smart phone is a smart-aleck phone.
After I finished with the yard work, I put Walk to End Alzheimer's signs and some of the pinwheel flowers from previous walks in our yar.
Once I went inside, I signed copies of "Ruminations of a Caregiver" to hand out at Saturday's Walk to End Alzheimer's.
While I was frantically trying to get everything done, I was home alone when I started having chest pains.
Yes, I've had them before, and had three stress tests th at showed my heart was in A-1 shape.
I took the meds that should have stopped the pain, but it kept right on coming.
I was 99% sure it was nothing to worry about, but that bitty 1% warned that my pain was classic heart attack symptoms.
All I have to say is never think you might be having a heart attack without taking a book to read.
I spent the better part of the day being poked and prodded, just to reaffirm that I had a non-emergency, emergency.
Anyway, the Walk to End Alzheimer's was a resounding success this year.
We had beautiful weather, great attendance, and exceeded our goal.
So Saturday was a long day, but a fulfilling day.
Whew.
Finally, I felt like I could rest, except Sunday was music practice; Monday, a doctor's appointment; and Tuesday, advocacy training; Wednesday, we played music at the first of three nursing homes.
Thursday, I had my oil changed, tires rotated, and brakes worked on.
It was time well spent because I logged on to the wi-fi and played my game while I waited.
Soon, I was speeding down the road, listening to music on Sirius FM.
I switched between stations listening for songs I might want to sing.
Music is soul food and conducive to rumination.
Copyright (c) September 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 7, 2019>
We had our annual Walk to End Alzheimer's fundraising "Traffic Stop" on Labor Day.
As usual, the day had its busy times and its lulls.
Our collections depend on the traffic building up at the stop sign in my hometown.
We took our positions along the road with our collection buckets.
My granddaughter entertained with her purple flag.
She threw it in the air and after it whirled around, she caught it, whipping into a pose.
Several people applauded, others cheered, and some commented on how impressive she was.
"You are helping my collections," I told her.
I commented on her poses after she caught it.
"I'm not showing off," she said.
"I went down on my knee because that's how I was able to catch the flag." She laughed and tossed it high.
"If I wanted to show off," she said, "I would do this." She caught the flag and did the splits.
This year, the city police officer decided to direct traffic--to avoid the backlog.
This has only happened a couple of times in the 21 years we've collected.
As the traffic approached us, the officer stood in the intersection, gesturing for the cars to keep moving.
One lady stopped in front of me, ignoring the urgency of the officer.
She dropped a donation into the container I held out for her.
With tears welling up in her eyes, she said, "My husband died from Alzheimer's about this time last year." With those few words, we connected.
"I'm so sorry.
I lost my husband to dementia too," I said.
She paused a moment, as if she had much more to say but couldn't find the words.
Then she drove through the intersection.
"He isn't doing us any favors," I told my sister.
"It's a little hard to collect when the traffic is whizzing by." At least he wasn't there all the time.
He would leave and return periodically.
Car after car ignored the opportunity to go through the intersection as they paused to give us collections and share their stories.
My granddaughter said, "The officer underestimated the generosity of people." The cool morning turned into a warm afternoon.
We had mini-conversations with the donors.
One woman handed me a $20 bill.
"This is to honor my mom and my grandma.
They both have Alzheimer's." After each donation, I said, "Thank you, have a safe trip home." Several people automatically said, "You too." Some of them seemed to hesitate as they realized they had wished me a safe trip.
One lady seemed particularly frustrated that she had said it.
I laughed.
"Everyone says the same thing," I assured her.
One man told me, "I don't have any money, but I'm going to the bank.
I'll be back," he promised.
The day wore on.
I heard stories about moms, dads, sisters, brothers, and friends who were living with dementia or had died with it.
The officer had left the intersection and we saw his car on a side street.
We assumed he was keeping an eye on the traffic from the comfort of his car rather than standing in the middle of a hot street.
We heard a siren.
He pulled a car over in front of where my daughter-in-law Stacey was collecting.
After he finished writing the ticket and walked back to his patrol car, I saw a hand come out the window to give Stacey a donation.
The afternoon sun was beating mercilessly down on us, so we began to gather up the signs and pinwheels.
A car drove onto the side street behind us and handed Stacey a $20 bill.
After he drove off, she turned to me and said, "That man told me he had to go to the bank." "He told me the same thing!
I never really thought he meant it," I said.
I guess you just can't underestimate the generosity of people.
Copyright (c) September 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 26, 2019>
On this cloudy, rainy August day, I thought about the Henry Wadsworth Longfellow quote, "Into each life, some rain must fall." It seems that sometimes the rain falls harder than it does at other times.
Last year, our Walk to End Alzheimer's was during a steady downpour.
We had rain at previous walks, but never a constant deluge like last year.
Although the Highway Gardens at the Missouri State Fairgrounds is a lovely place to hold our walk, the grounds turned into a mud pit.
Tents and tables sank into the mud and turned over.
I couldn't take my books out of the tubs.
Although, we handled the weather as well as could be expected, it inspired us to get off our keisters and look for a location that had some shelter.
This year, for the first time, we chose Centennial Park and a different weekend.
When you hold an annual outdoor event, it isn't a matter of if it will rain on that special day, but when it will rain.
The same holds true for life.
Rain happens.
Gully washers happen during our darkest moments.
We hear the rolling thunder and feel sharp pangs of lightning bolts when they strike our hearts.
Clouds seem to hang over our heads blocking out the sunshine that should warm our souls.
Flash floods threaten to wash away our optimism and feelings of self worth.
Then we have the steady downpours.
Just when we think we're between showers, it starts up again soaking us to the bone.
Then a cold wind blows away our defenses and we might as well be naked as wrapped in wet garments.
We get to the point where we just can't take anymore.
At some point, a little droplet of rain can be the tipping point.
During scattered showers, we can dash from thought to action and never get wet.
If all fails, we can throw on a rain jacket and pop up an umbrella.
We know that scattered showers replenish our spirits and blossoms into a bright array of color.
During scattered showers, we realize that rain is essential to life and that without it, we, and everything we love, would die.
Then the sun breaks through the clouds and we remember that "a sunshiny shower won't last half an hour." A half hour isn't long and most of us can remain optimistic for that length of time.
Life is different degrees of rain, but rain is essential to life.
Photo credit: Jessica Buesing, The Scarlett Lens Copyright (c) August 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 14, 2019>
Each year the Missouri State Fair has a theme, and this year's theme "Come Home" is thought provoking.
Since I live a few short miles from the State Fair City, I just need to drive across town to "come home" to the fair.
Like many people in Sedalia, I'm not that thrilled about the fair.
Oh, yes, I've enjoyed concerts, walking through the exhibits, working at the Missouri Coop Building, and have spent countless hours on the midway while I kept an eye on the young ones in the family.
I have great memories, good memories, and wish-I-was-home-under-the-air-conditioner memories.
The first night of the fair this year was pleasant, but I was too exhausted to consider going.
Since then, the weather has ranged from hot to bake-a-cake hot.
Then, there's the occasional thunderstorm.
Oh, yes, we can be in the middle of a drought, but you can count on rain during the fair.
One of the first things that crossed my mind with "Come Home" was the exact feeling I always had when Jim and I drove into Estes Park.
We went to Rocky Mountain National Park each year, and although some things changed from year-to-year, the predominant emotion was a sense of homecoming.
Along with the eventual changes in Estes Park were the inevitable changes in Jim.
Our first trips, we spent camping, hiking, and going to the Lazy-B Ranch for music and a delicious meal.
The last few times, we stayed in a cabin, and I watched Jim lose the ability to camp and hike.
It was the end of an era for us.
While Jim was in the nursing home, I made a trip to Estes Park with my mom, sister, and sister-in-law.
I hadn't been to the mountains for several years.
It was like coming home to a different house.
Everything had changed so much physically and emotionally.
Several of my favorite shops had closed, the visitor's center had grown into a huge hub of activity, and the Lazy-B Ranch was no longer in existence.
I didn't have Jim to cook a campfire breakfast, to sneak treats to "Chubby" the chipmunk, or to sit around the campfire and tell tall tales.
We all know that everything changes through the years, even our home.
We may long for the familiar home of our memories and to see loved ones who live in the homes of our hearts, but are no longer with us.
Home is where our stories began and where we became who we are.
It doesn't matter if we lived in a shack long ago and now live in a mansion.
There is a chunk of our being that is wrapped in the recollections of our beginnings.
Home.
The word isn't just any old word.
Home is a word that entails a visual image in 3-D, complete with smells and sounds.
Memories of home can be good or bad for a lot of reasons.
Regardless, it is a big part of each of us.
The lessons we learn from our parents mingle with our DNA to mold us into the adults we become later in life.
Copyright (c) August 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 1, 2019>
A few years ago, we received a microwave popcorn popper as a door prize at an annual meeting.
The first time we tried to pop corn, the top melted and the popcorn was charred.
Since it didn't work, I prepared to dump it in the trash.
"Keep it," my husband, the farmer, said.
"We might be able to use it for something else." I threw away the melted lid and kept the bottom part, against my better judgment.
I saw the plastic bowl with a handle as a waste of space.
Even as a popcorn popper, I didn't see much use for it since I can't eat popcorn.
Oddly enough, we use the plastic bowl almost daily for scraps and vegetable peelings.
When we start preparing a meal, one of us will say, "I need the plastic bowl." Although not its intended use, it is our most used kitchen container.
Every Memorial Day, I search for a plastic vase to take fresh flowers to the Veterans Cemetery.
For the unaware, it is practically impossible to find a plastic vase.
My husband came up with the idea of cutting the top off a Simply Apple juice bottle and wrapping it in patriotic duck tape.
Not its intended use, but it works.
Sometimes medication can be used for a different purpose, called off-label use.
It takes years to develop and test medication, but when a drug can be used for more than one condition, it dramatically shortens the time to get the drug to consumers.
One of the off-label uses for the  Alzheimer's drug Memantine (Nameda) is for it to be added to the standard therapy used to treat obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and attention deficit order (ADHD).
Antipsychotic drugs are often used off label to treat the symptoms of Alzheimer's.
One of the common drugs used is Seroquel.
Another off label use for Seroquel is for Insomnia.
I believe more caution should be used in prescribing antipsychotic drugs to people with Alzheimer's.
Jim had some serious reactions to them.
Seroquel was commonly prescribed to residents in the Alzheimer's unit.
They tried it on Jim and instead of calming him, it made him hyperactive.
Other psychotic drugs caused him to be angry and out of control.
One even caused so much foam coming out of his mouth that he couldn't eat or drink.
The physicians treating him swore they had never seen that reaction before.
Although commonly used in people with dementia, antipsychotics increase the risk of death and decrease the quality of life.
While looking for a home for Jim, I visited one home where the Alzheimer's residents appeared to be in a stupor.
I thought it odd at the time, but after seeing how antipsychotic drugs affect most people with dementia, I'm sure they were overmedicated.
Not all drugs used off-label are bad.
Many years go into the development of prescription drugs and off-label use of an approved drug can bring relief to a patient, or even be life-saving.
For example, some cancer drugs are approved for one type of cancer, but may successfully treat a different type.
Chemotherapy treatments are often a combination of drugs that fight more than one type of cancer.
Sometimes, veering from the intended purpose can be successful, and sometimes it can create problems.
Antipsychotic drugs for people with dementia can be life-threatening and more harmful than helpful.
Using a popcorn popper for a receptacle for scraps is handy and safe--in fact, safer than using it in the microwave!
Copyright (c) July 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 20, 2019>
It is hard not to be frustrated that Alzheimer's is a terminal disease.
It is easy to feel helpless and hopeless, but that is not productive.
We need to grasp the reins and do everything within our power to take care of those who have the disease, find effective treatment, and find a cure.
It is also a major goal to prevent Alzheimer's in the first case.
Until an immunization is perfected, research has given us tools to reduce our chances of developing Alzheimer's, or possibly delay the onset.
Dr. Rudi Tanzi recommends lifestyle changes to reduce the risk of Alzheimer's disease as much as 60%.
He says the word shield can be used to remind you of healthy habits that can help keep your body and brain healthy.The word shield can be used to remind you of healthy habits that can help keep your body and brain healthy.
Sleep.
We need our zzz's to function.
The rule of thumb used to be eight hours, but in today's world, we don't go to bed at dark and get up at daylight.
Shift workers may have a difficult time to get a good "days" sleep.
When our internal circadian clock gets out of whack (not the medical term!)
the brain doesn't go through its cycle to wash away the plagues that want to clog up our brains.
Handle stress.
I don't want to cause stress by mentioning how detrimental to a person's health stress is.
Stress releases the hormone cortisol, which can damage brain cells and cause inflammation.
Recent studies indicate that brain inflammation is linked to Alzheimer's disease.
We can't avoid stress; we can only manage it.
Interact with friends.
Being socially active is your "friend" when fighting Alzheimer's disease.
By socially, I'm not talking Facebook friends who may be more annoying than helpful.
I'm talking about friends who have your back and bring joy into your life.
If that happens to be your Facebook friends, then by all means, interact to your heart's content.
Loneliness and isolation increases the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
Exercise.
We all know the benefits of exercise.
Exercise increases energy level, reduces stress, and helps us maintain a healthier body and brain.
Yes, exercise helps your brain.
It increases the blood flow in the brain and helps cognition.
Find a physical activity you enjoy that fits your physical condition.
Exercise with friends to double your fight against Alzheimer's disease!
Learn new things.
If you are like me, you want to learn new things.
I learned to play the ukulele about two years ago and now I've joined the family band.
We play music once a month in three different nursing homes.
Learning new things create new synapses in your brain.
How cool is that?
Having fun and helping my brain.
Diet.
No, don't go on a crash diet!
Yo-yo dieting is bad, bad, bad for your health.
Your mama knew what she was talking about when she told you to eat your veggies.
A Mediterranean type diet reduces the risk of Alzheimer's disease.
A diet rich in vegetables, fruits, legumes, whole grains, fish, and olive oil is good for your heart and your brain.
So, instead of starving yourself, feed your brain!
If we do all these things are we guaranteed not to develop Alzheimer's?
The short answer is no.
If you wear a seatbelt, it does not guarantee that you will not be injured or killed in an auto accident, but it does increase your chances of survival.
If you exercise and lower cholesterol, it doesn't mean you will not have heart disease, but it lowers your risk.
Life doesn't come with a guarantee warding off ugly diseases, but use your SHIELD for the best defense against Alzheimer's disease.
source: Tanzi, Dr. Rudi, NBC Nightly News, July 16, 2019 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bgkJWQkngAw Copyright (c) July 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, July 5, 2019>
Our Walk to End Alzheimer's group participated in the annual 4th of July Parade.
My friend WyAnn had prepared a sign that said, Imagine a Land Free from Alzheimer's.
Along the parade route, there isn't much time to think of anything, but after the excitement died down, I couldn't stop thinking about that sign.
What if our land was free from Alzheimer's?
Think of how much that would impact the 5.8 million American families who have a loved one with Alzheimer's disease.
Imagine what a wonderful world this would be.
Our memories, personalities, and skills are the most basic part of our lives.
Yet, dementia steals those precious qualities from people we love.
Our mothers become our daughters.
Our fathers become our sons.
Our spouses become our children as we love them and care for them.
Collectively, we American families provide 18.5 billion hours each year taking care of our own.
From personal experience, I can tell you that being a primary caregiver for someone with dementia is not for sissies or the squeamish.
In the early stages, my caregiver duty was to keep Jim on track.
I went to the doctor with him and kept track of his medication.
His skill levels began to diminish.
A man who once had the ability to tear a car down and put it back together would dismantle a vacuum sweeper or a VCR, but couldn't reassemble the parts.
In the middle stages, caregiving was more intense.
The day started with helping him bathe and get dressed for the day.
These jobs became harder as the disease progressed, and he needed more help with toileting and incontinence.
Jim only needed about four hours sleep, and I couldn't sleep with him wandering around the house, or worse yet outside in the dark.
His wandering was dangerous and along with other behavior problems, it was obvious he needed a safer environment.
Caregiving doesn't end at the nursing home door!
Some caregivers are comfortable with providing emotional support, interacting with staff, and supervising care.
My comfort level was to make sure Jim was clean, fed, and comfortable.
For the five years Jim was in nursing care, I, or a member of our family, checked on him almost every day and assisted with his care.
The clock is ticking.
Every 65 seconds another person in our land begins the Alzheimer's journey.
Imagine if that didn't happen, or if it did, it could be cured.
Well, if wishing and hoping could make it happen, dementia wouldn't exist.
According to the Alzheimer's Association, Alzheimer's will triple in a generation if we don't have a medical breakthrough.
We can't have a breakthrough without research.
When I first went to DC to advocate for Alzheimer's research funding, NIH had budgeted less than $500 million for research.
I know that to you and me that sounds like a lot of money, but it is barely a blip on the radar of research possibilities.
Research was stalled at a time when it should have been accelerated.
If you don't see that, look at how our country used the necessary resources to find an effective treatment for HIV and AIDS.
HIV/AIDS was once the inevitable death sentence that Alzheimer's is today.
It has taken us two decades to reach a level of research funding that could bring about a positive result.
Now, we need to be relentless in advocating for research dollars.
We cannot afford to wait another two decades for a cure.
The clock is ticking.
Imagine if our land was free from Alzheimer's disease. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 24, 2019>
For the past couple of years, several of us women who graduated from the same high school meet for lunch once a month.
I reconnected with several friends that I hadn't seen in years.
We've bonded over life's circumstances and decided that we like each other much better now that we're older.
These mini reunions led to us becoming a planning committee for our 50th class reunion.
When we think about it, life is full of reunions.
A chance meeting in a grocery store, a club meeting, a conference, or a public event can be a reunion.
Each year at the Walk to End Alzheimer's I see some people I haven't seen in quite awhile.
Some return year after year, and others are just beginning the Alzheimer's journey.
These are bittersweet reunions.
We are happy to see each other, sad for the circumstances.
Each year at the Alzheimer's Forum, I have a reunion with my good friends Sarah, Jane, and Kathy.
A year is a long time, but it seems that we can almost pick up our conversations from the previous year mid-sentence.
We all lost our husbands to dementia and developed an amazingly strong bond.
We are sisters of the heart.
We reunite with friends and relatives on social media and make new "friends." We can keep up with births, deaths, marriages, as well as, what someone had for dinner.
The important events are often interspersed with mundane observations, political rants, and too much information.
The jury is still out as to whether the benefits outweigh the drawbacks.
We are caught up in our own little world and are shocked when we learn of a friend or family member's death.
What is the first thing we all say when we run into family members at funerals?
"We need to get together somewhere besides a funeral!" Sound familiar?
Yet, we go our separate ways and lead our separate lives.
We never get around to making that call, meeting for lunch, or making that road trip.
Since I've joined the Capps Family Band, I spend more time with my birth family than I have in years.
Although I've not accomplished many of my retirement goals, at least I've done well in spending more time with my mom and siblings.
We have two practice sessions a month and play music at three different nursing homes around the middle of each month.
An additional benefit of playing music is that I get to spend more time with my aunt.
She likes to hear us sing at the nursing home, so my mom and I pick her up when we play in Versailles.
I think I've spent more time with her in the past two years than all the years before.
Whether it's at the grocery store, a family reunion, or a chance meeting, I love running into friends and family.
Even if we only have a brief conversation and a quick hug, it reminds me of the connections I've made throughout my life.
Mini reunions make my heart sing.
Copyright (c) June 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 12, 2019>
Thinking back, I can't remember how many weddings I've attended.
The last one, just a few days ago, was for my granddaughter, Whitney.
During the ceremony, the minister said something that resonated with me.
He read the standard verses from 1 Corinthians 13:4-8 that I had heard at numerous weddings.
After he read the verses, he pointed out that love is described as actions, not emotions.
After the promises and commitment to a life together, I watched my beautiful granddaughter dance with her handsome groom.
My eyes blurred with tears at how quickly the years have gone by.
I thought of her first "wedding dance" when she was curled in her Grandpa Jim's arm as she danced between us at her Uncle Bob and Aunt Stacey's wedding.
The minister's words about love being actions made me realize a truth.
No matter how much someone professes their love, if their actions don't reinforce their words, they undermine them.
Too often emotions stand in the way of logic, self-respect, and in extreme cases--personal safety.
Thinking of love as action is an excellent way to begin a marriage and when the time or circumstances warrant, it is the only way to end a lifetime commitment.
Love as action is the best way to describe the love of a caregiver for a spouse or other family member who has dementia.
Love is patient.
A caregiver has to be patient and allow her loved one to do as much as he can for as long as he can.
Yes, it might be easier and faster to do it yourself, but allow extra time for your loved one to perform daily tasks.
As the disease progresses, it takes time and patience to provide the level of care that a person with dementia requires.
Love is kind.
As a person loses his skills, it is important to appreciate what remains instead of complaining about what a person cannot do.
To belittle a person who has dementia when they make a mistake would make as much sense as kicking someone's broken leg because they couldn't walk on it.
Being kind will help you sleep better at night.
It is not easily angered.
When a caregiver actively cultivates patience and kindness, it would follow that he would be less likely to become angry with his loved one.
You may have to constantly remind yourself that it is the disease that is responsible for behavior problems.
It always protects.
One of the main jobs of a caregiver is to protect your loved one.
You are responsible for your loved ones safety and physical well-being.
You may even be responsible for your loved one's financial stability.
A caregiver finds the strength to stand up against anyone who tries to take advantage or abuse her loved one in any way.
Love always hopes.
When we can no longer hope for our loved one to regain his health, we can hope that he will have a good day.
We can hope for a cure, so that a disease that stripped away our loved one's talents, his quality of life, or her memories won't strike others down.
Love perseveres.
Dementia is not a sprint; it's a marathon.
A caregiver must have perseverance to provide loving care for years and years.
Love never fails.
Unconditional love is about the only way to describe caregiver love.
We all expect the love we give to be reciprocated, but when dementia is involved that may not be the case.
When it comes to dementia, a parent or a spouse may become like a child.
Instead of fading away, your love may become stronger as it evolves into a different kind of love--one that is action combined with the emotional memory you hold in your heart.
Copyright (c) June 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 5, 2019>
From the day Jim was diagnosed with an Alzheimer's type of dementia, I researched the disease through all sources possible.
I used the Internet, books, pamphlets, watched TV specials, and talked to some of the top researchers in the country.
My conclusion was that early onset dementia and dementia in older people seemed to be two different diseases.
It seemed obvious to me that early onset progressed much faster.
That didn't seem logical since younger people generally started out with healthier bodies.
Yet, I found that the median life expectancy of younger-onset Alzheimer's was six to eight years.
For those diagnosed with Alzheimer's later in life, the average life expectancy was ten years, but could be as long as twenty years or more.
Now, researchers have discovered that some seniors who had been diagnosed with Alzheimer's actually had a type of dementia identified as LATE (Limbic-predominant Age-related TDP-43 Encephalopathy).
Although LATE mimics Alzheimer's disease, the proteins beta-amyloid plaques and tau tangles that are the hallmark signs of Alzheimer's do not cause the dementia.
LATE is caused by deposits of the protein TDP-43 (transactive response DNA binding protein of 43 kDa) in the brain.
The report identifying LATE was published in the April 30, 2019, issue of the journal Brain.
This is a major breakthrough in how researchers will look at dementia in older adults.
LATE is believed to affect 25% of seniors with dementia who are eighty-five years or older.
At the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum in Washington, D.C., advocates often receive reports from Richard Hodes, M.D.
director of the National Institute on Aging (NIA), part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
This latest development in the study of dementia can be seen as an opportunity.
Dr. Hodes said, "The guidance provided in this report, including the definition of LATE, is a crucial step toward increasing awareness and advancing research for both this disease and Alzheimer's as well." Abnormal TDP-3 had been previously identified in ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.
TDP-3 has been found in FTLD (frontotemporal lobar degeneration).
FTLD is a group of disorders that affects the frontal and/or temporal areas of the brain.
FTD (frontotemporal degeneration) is a rare disease more commonly found in those younger than sixty years of age.
The progression of LATE is slower than Alzheimer's disease.
When LATE and Alzheimer's disease are both present, the disease progresses more rapidly than either disease does alone.
The information from this study came from brain autopsy reports.
We had an autopsy on Jim's brain for the simple reason that I wanted to know what disease he had and whether it was hereditary.
Of several terms used in his autopsy, I recognized a few: neurodegenerative disorder, incidental Lewy body, frontotemporal atrophy, swollen neurons, and tau positive glial inclusions.
The cover letter said that Jim showed no signs of Alzheimer's.
He had corticobasal degeneration, a rare (non-hereditary) disease, and one I had never heard of.
Treatments targeting beta amyloid plaques would not be effective in a disease that does not have the plaques.
Rare diseases do not have the funding of diseases that are more common.
Funding Alzheimer's research is our greatest hope of finding effective treatment for other types of dementia.
Sources: https://www.nia.nih.gov/news/guidelines-proposed-newly-defined-alzheimers-brain-disorder https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/04/190430121800.htm Copyright (c) June 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 28, 2019>
When I first started elementary school, our workbook had pictures of objects, and the assignment was to choose the one that was different and did not belong.
We would color the pictures and circle the one that wasn't the same.
Later, Sesame Street brought the fun to TV with a song of encouragement.
Now, almost daily, I see a screen of numbers or letters and the caption, "It will take a genius..." to figure out, for example, which one of the numbers is an 8 instead of a 9.
I'm thinking it doesn't take a genius to know that you are not a genius just because you spot the one that is different.
I've seen two things in the last week that stood out from the norm and were obviously different.
First, I was walking the dog one night and heard a rumbling sound as we walked down the driveway that I couldn't identify.
Even the dog was looking around to see what it was.
I looked up at the bright twinkling stars and clear sky and couldn't see anything that would be making the noise.
I walked the dog up the driveway, turned around, and headed back toward the highway.
All of a sudden, a low hanging cloud moved swiftly across the sky.
The odd shaped cloud barely cleared the apple tree in our yard.
At first I thought it was smoke, but I couldn't smell it and there seemed to be no origin.
To be honest, it looked creepy and when I turned my back on it to head toward the house, I felt prickles run across my scalp and had the feeling someone was watching me.
The next odd thing I saw was at the Veterans Cemetery when my son, sister-in-law, and I took flowers to place in front of Jim's niche.
After we placed the flowers, we enjoyed the peaceful beauty of the cemetery.
Rob and I walked away from the columbarium toward the headstones.
There, not too far from the road, but several feet from the graves, was a vase of artificial flowers with a partially deflated helium balloon attached.
It was stuck in the ground and looked pretty much like a fancy lawn dart.
We speculated as to why the floral arrangement was in such an odd place.
They weren't the same as all the other flowers placed on the graves.
We sometimes see an anomaly among our fellow human beings.
Some people are just different from the others.
Since we are all unique, a certain amount of difference is expected.
Jim was one of those rare individuals who marched to his own drum, and did not believe in blindly following the norm.
His ideas and beliefs were often delightfully imaginative, and at the same time, his stubbornness could be maddening.
Life can become so mundane and routine that we tend to expect sameness and may not notice when things are unusual.
Still, the day Jim forgot his social security number and birth date was the day I realized something was different and that nothing would ever be the same.
Later, I tried to remember other clues that indicated  the horrible disease that was just beginning to unfold.
I couldn't think of anything that seemed to be outside the norm.
Once alerted,  I began to notice glitches in his thinking, his abilities, and his personality.
The differences seemed to snowball, steadily going downhill and picking up speed.
It was nearly a year before others began to notice Jim's problems.
Up until then, I think they thought I was exaggerating, or that I was the one with a problem.
Yes, we often see things that are different, but instead of really noticing them, they blend in with the minutiae of everyday life.
Some differences that come out of a clear blue sky, or are stuck into a grassy knoll, make no impact on the grand scheme of things.
But differences that occur in the 100 billion brain cells of someone you love are life changing.
Copyright (c) May 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 17, 2019>
I just went on a nine-day vacation with my mom and sisters--our Girls Trip 2019.
We had a relaxing time in both the mountains and on the beach.
Nine days without thinking about obligations brings to mind that... Life Is Good: In Savannah, GA, we took a trolley tour of old Savannah.
Our one stop was at the Riverwalk.
We ate lunch at the Shrimp Factory and visited a couple of shops.
One of them, Fannie's Your Aunt, offered Life Is Good t-shirts.
I found two that caught my eye and both had to do with music.
Since I've joined the Capps Family Band, I practice my songs while I walk the dog.
Did you know that singing lowers stress and helps with mental health?
Singing also boosts memory.
Life Is Exasperating: Back home, life settled into the normal routine.
Get up, take the dog out, fix breakfast, clean up, etc., etc.
Most of all, I spent hours and hours trying to catch up on all the work I skipped out on while enjoying my vacation.
Isn't that the downside of vacation?
I've never had those little elves come in and do my work while I'm out of town.
Life Is Predictable: I can't help but notice that life is predictable.
I can always count on the predictability of a normal day.
The sun comes up every morning in the east and sets in the west.
It rains from time-to-time, usually when we need to do outside work, and the grass grows faster than we can cut it.
This was going to be the year we kept ahead of it--until it rained and rained and rained.
We can't mow our lawn when the yard has the squishiness of a rice paddy.
Life Is Scary: It's hard to go through a very long period without a heart-stopping close call on the highway.
There's nothing quite as fun as topping a hill and seeing cars headed your way in both lanes.
Even in the safety of my home, I've had a few scares--one as recently as this morning.
I was cooking breakfast and sipping my coffee while I watched the sausage brown.
Normal early morning...until...I realized the kitchen was filling up with smoke.
I turned around and smoke billowed from beneath the cabinets and along the countertop.
I opened cabinet doors although I couldn't figure out how a fire could start in the cabinets.
"Harold, Harold!" I yelled.
"There's smoke everywhere and I can't figure out where it's coming from!" He came into the kitchen, looked around, calmly, which by-the-way was totally irritating when I was in a panic.
He reached over and unplugged the toaster where our normally pale toast that has to be pushed down twice was completely charred.
Life Is Mysterious: I could regale you with stories of mysterious events in my life, but that would be a book of its own.
Just this week, I was washing dishes and began to sing "Que Sera Sera," which to be honest, I hadn't even thought of in years.
The next day, Doris Day passed away.
Just a little odd, I thought.
Last night, Harold was watching an old Law and Order rerun on the TV in the bedroom, and I decided to catch up on the pile of newspapers I hadn't read.
I sat down on the couch in our kitchen and picked up a random newspaper.
An article about the measles caught my eye.
As I began to read, I could hear the medical examiner on the TV program "testifying" about how a child had died from the measles.
As I read the next two lines, I was reading the words she was using to testify.
That was mysterious and a little bit creepy.
Life Is Not Fair: I always try to be fair, but there isn't too much fair about life.
Good people have terrible things happen to them and bad people have prosperity and lead charmed lives.
That's just the way it goes.
Jim was a good person and certainly did not deserve to have a horrible disease that robbed him of his most precious memories.
Life Is Attitude: How you look at life determines how life looks at you.
If you see the negative, the negative consumes you.
If you see the positive and spiritual uplifting side of life, it returns the favor.
Life is good if you allow it to be.
Copyright (c) May 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 28, 2019>
A group of my former classmates and I are planning our fifty year class reunion.
Several have brought in photos taken on our senior trip to the Smoky Mountains.
As they look at the tiny, blurry photos and reminisce, I realize how little I remember about the trip.
I remembered the Grand Ole Opry.
I remembered the towns of Gatlinburg and Chattanooga, Tennessee.
I remembered traveling to the top of the mountain in a cable car.
But as far as the shenanigans--the fake gun fight, the bathroom window on the bus falling out, a group going out looking for a place to bowl and getting stopped by the local police--I have zero recollection.
"I know I wasn't drunk, so I don't know why I can't remember all the things you remember," I said to the group.
"I can't remember much about it either," Cindy admitted.
Maybe the reason the memory of the senior trip faded so quickly for me was because Jim and I traveled so much.
We always went west, but once in a while I would suggest the Smoky Mountains, but it just didn't work into our plans.
Now, oddly enough, on close to the fiftieth anniversary of the senior trip, we will be taking our girls' trip to South Carolina.
On the way, we will be going through the Smoky Mountains.
For me, this is an area I haven't been to in half a century.
It seems just a little odd that I went to a meeting with the planning committee and drove a few blocks to my mom's house to plan a trip to the same area.
One thing I'm sure of--a lot will have changed in fifty years.
If nothing else, I have changed.
I can't help but wonder if I'll visit certain sites that will bring about a feeling of deja vu.
Will the places call forth events stored in locked parts of my brain?
Will I feel sadness for those in the class of '69 who now reside in eternity and not with us?
I have heard that some of my former classmates have memory problems.
I don't know that anyone has been diagnosed with dementia, but then not everyone receives a diagnosis.
According to the statistics, one in ten of us will develop Alzheimer's in our lifetimes.
We have already reached the age of vulnerability, and are too old for younger onset dementia.
It's a little bit concerning that I can't remember much at all about the senior trip, but it would be devastating to not know the people I love.
Recently, I've visited with two men who held an important role in my life.
One looked at me and said, "I don't know who you are." So, I told him who I was.
The other gave me a hug, but never talked or showed any recognition in his eyes.
You have to hate a disease that does that to people you love.
Although it made me sad, I didn't regret seeing either of them.
One, I was told, was just having a bad day.
The other, I was told, can't remember anything anymore.
His family is just spending time with him and helping him enjoy life as much as they can.
Unfortunately, the road less traveled is often the one that leads to special care units in nursing homes.
Excuses abound, but sometimes people just don't have the fortitude to give unconditional love to those who no longer seem to even know who they are.
In the end, when they can't remember you, you still remember them.
If the person you are hesitating to visit played a major role in your life, you are cheating yourself.
If you don't share hugs, words of love, and bring a smile to someone's face, you are the big loser.
Travel that road.
Take the time to hold fast to the memories that linger in your heart.
Life has robbed a person with dementia of their memories, and he lives only in the moment.
The more moments you share with your loved one, the more happiness you bring into his life, and yours.
As we travel through life, we need to enjoy the journey before we reach the final destination.
Copyright (c) April 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 18, 2019>
Some dates are seared into our memories and leave scars on our hearts.
For me, that date is April 18, 2005.
When I flipped my calendar to April, I didn't think of flowers, thunderstorms, morel mushrooms, or even mowing the grass.
I mentally, went back in time and remembered that April was the cruel month...when the beginning melded into the end.
The good guy lost, and the relentless disease won.
I'd been so busy this month that it didn't seem possible that today was already the eighteenth day of the month.
The month began in Washington DC at the Alzheimer's Forum.
Then, there was the catching up to do with all the projects I'd put on hold to take time away, including the annual scourge known as taxes.
Today, the eighteenth of April, was a busy day.
At nine o'clock this morning, I drove to Versailles for a 50-year class reunion committee meeting.
Reconnecting with my former classmates has been a positive experience.
As usual, when our work was done, we went to lunch.
After lunch, I picked up my mom and my aunt to go to the nursing home for our monthly music gig.
We began set up at 2:00, and began our hour-long program at 2:30.
One of my former classmates had brought some scanned photos for the reunion book and stayed to watch the program.
"This is a lot of talent in one family," she said.
My mom and I had a short visit over a cup of coffee, and then I headed home.
The sun was setting in the west by the time I pulled into the garage.
The day was almost done.
The black aura lifted some as the day dwindled down.
Tonight, I put the leash on the dog, slipped on my coat, and stepped out into the darkness.
The clouds parted and the moon slid into view.
As often happens in the still of the night I was left with my thoughts and memories.
The sorrow seeped into the fiber of my being, and hid beneath the surface.
I thought about how Jim had always been a part of my life, and always would be.
I remembered how Jim, a man of faith, told me that death was merely closing one door and opening another.
A cold breeze sent shivers through my body.
It was as if he had whispered to my heart: the end has melded into the beginning, and the good guy won after all.
Copyright (c) April 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 17, 2019>
My trip to the Alzheimer's Forum this year coincided with the Cherry Blossom Festival and the Blossom Kite Festival.
It so happened that when my traveling buddy Jennifer and I ventured out, we ran into human traffic jams every step of the way.
It was a little claustrophobic at times, especially when we were stuck at the metro exit behind a crowd of slow moving people.
Capitol Hill didn't seem quite as congested as usual this year and for the most part the security lines moved and a decent pace.
It helped that we weren't rushed between our appointments.
After our forum training and updates on all things Alzheimer's, we were prepared to speak of Alzheimer's as the public health crisis it has become.
We had four asks for our legislators: 1)      Increase Alzheimer's research funding at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) by $350 million for fiscal year 2020.
Currently, 5.8 million Americans are living with Alzheimer's disease.
Without a medical breakthrough, that number will triple in a generation!
2)      Support $20 million in fiscal year 2020 to implement the BOLD Infrastructure for Alzheimer's Act at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Bold will establish Alzheimer's and Related Dementias Public Health Centers of Excellence, fund public health departments, and increase data analysis and timely reporting.
3)      Co-sponsor the Improving HOPE for Alzheimer's Act (S. 880/H.R.
1873.
In 2017, only 1% of seniors living with Alzheimer's received the Medicare care planning benefit.
We must educate providers and individuals with dementia about available care planning services.
4)      Co-sponsor the Younger-Onset Alzheimer's Disease Act (S. 901/HR 1903).
This would allow individuals with younger-onset dementia to receive services provided under the Older Americans Act, currently available only to Americans over the age of 60.
Our first visit of the day was with Senator Blunt who has become a champion for Alzheimer's.
He greeted us, began to speak of the tremendous cost of Alzheimer's, and compared it to the defense budget.
Next, the Missouri delegation attended the Senate Hearing on Alzheimer's disease.
In his remarks, Senator Hawley recognized our fellow advocate Lonni Schicker and briefly told about her younger-onset diagnosis.
After the hearing, we visited his office.
My last meeting of the day was with Congresswoman Vicky Hartzler's office.
I only met with her briefly since she had to go to the floor for a vote.
We finished our visit with her senior legislative assistant, Bryan McVae.
After speaking to our legislators, we came away with the feeling that we are in this battle together.
This is different from when we used to have to spend all our time convincing them that Alzheimer's affects all of us in one way or another.
Our hopes are flying as high as a Blossom Festival kite that by working together, we can and will find a cure.
For the past few years, I've stayed an extra night to avoid the nail biting rush to the airport.
I'd much rather be way early than just a few minutes too late to catch a flight home.
At the airport, we came across some fellow advocates for a "selfie." Then, we disbursed to our separate homes to continue the fight to end Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) April 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 31, 2019>
Al I'm in Washington DC for my 19th Alzheimer's Forum.
You would think after 19 times, it would be the same-old, same-old, but you would be wrong.
Here it is almost April, and we had April Fool's a few days early.
After a short warm snap, Jennifer and I had no more gotten to the airport that snow began to fall.
We were flying Southwest so we had no assigned seats, but Jennifer's mascot elephant, Al, held my seat for me until I boarded the plane.
A disembodied voice from the cockpit ask us to be patient while they de-iced the plane.
I was curious since I had never been on a plane that had to be de-iced.
Pretty soon, a cart pulled up, with a bold sign letting us know that "The Ice Man" was on the job.
A ten-second squirt and we were off and running.
After grabbing our two purple suitcases off the carousel, Jennifer and I embarked on the second new experience of the day.
I've always caught a cab to the hotel, but Jennifer had an account, and we were to be picked up by a white Toyota by a Lyft driver named Olga.
We were both excited to be in DC on a pleasant, sun shiny day and didn't mind waiting a few minutes for Olga to arrive.
Jennifer was in contact with her and she assured us she was nearby.
As we stood there viewing the screen, a young man standing nearby said, "Are you Jennifer?"
We found out it was his first attempt with Lyft, but he was sharing a ride with us.
Jared was going to a different hotel.
They both received notification that Olga had arrived and she was in a blue Camry.
We spotted her and loaded up.
Lucky for us, all Jared had was a backpack because the truck was full of purple.
Al was in the trunk in the carry on.
We should have kept him as a navigator.
Olga told us it was her first day with Lyft after working with Uber for six years.
So, here we were, a car full of newbies heading into DC proper looking for not one, but two hotel.
Jared was closer so the navigation system was set up to let him off first.
Olga took off headed in the direction of the nav, and I could almost hear Al screaming in the trunk, "I don't think she knows where she's going!"
After we had made several exits, it looked to me like we were closer our hotel located near the zoo that a hotel close to the White House.
After all, I'd been on several harrowing taxi drives to the same hotel.
Jared pulled up navigation on his phone.
"We're pretty close to our hotel," I said from the back seat.
I pulled up my own map.
It said we were within six minutes of our hotel.
Olga made a U-turn and headed back across the bridge we had just crossed.
Jared tried to be helpful, but she still missed an exit or two, narrowly missed crashing into a car that cut in front of us.
Thankfully, her car had great brakes!
"We are getting a nice tour of the city," I remarked.
Finally, after about forty minutes, we found Jared's hotel.
By then, my phone had "re-routed" several times and Olga was headed in the right direction.
Her phone kept telling her to drop Jared off instead of telling her how to get to our hotel.
Eventually, her navigation and mine agreed.
I saw the landmarks I was used to seeing including Marilyn Monroe's face on a building.
"We are close," I told Olga.
I saw the Omni Shoreham where we'll be staying the last night.
I saw CVS, familiar restaurants.
"This is our neighborhood," I told Jennifer.
Olga zigged when she should have zagged.
"Here it is," she said.
It was the back entrance.
"All you need to do is go around the block and you can let us off in the front," I said.
She took off, flew past the front entrance.
Oops.
I finally saw a side entrance we often used.
"Here," I said.
"Let us off here."
"Are you sure?"
she asked.
"I don't think this is the right hotel."
Well, the name was right above the door.
When we got to our room and unpacked Al, he had a smug look on his face.
We immediately took off to look at the monuments, cherry blossoms, and the kite flying.
As we rushed off to get caught up in the humongous crowds, Al stayed behind in the room patiently waiting for us to attend to the business we came to DC to accomplish.
He wears his purple beads, his AIM (Alzheimer's Impact Movement) pin, and his Walk to End Alzheimer's Team Captain button.
Al is ready and waiting.
Be patient, Al.
In a few hours, we will be all business and determination.
We will be like Al and fight to #ENDALZ.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 23, 2019>
A few days ago, I was listening to some songs on my Kindle in an attempt to find something to sing with the Capps Family Band at our nursing home gigs.
I listened to Patsy Cline, Emmylou Harris, Ray Price, Jim Reeves...and the list goes on.
Eventually, I went out of YouTube and decided to go to bed.
After I was ready for bed, I woke up my Kindle and clicked on the Book tab.
I heard the intro to the Johnny Cash version of "Ring of Fire" with its unmistakable mariachi horns.
The music stopped when I opened the book I'd been reading.
The book?
Ring of Fire by Brad Taylor.
Some might call that a coincidence, but my goose bumps classified the experience as more "weird" than "coincidental." It seemed it was a message of some kind, but I didn't have a clue as to what it could possibly mean.
So if we think of love circled with a fiery ring, I believe you could say that nothing could penetrate that ring to destroy the all-consuming love within its circle.
However you look at it, fire in the song is symbolic.
Fire has many symbolic meanings, and I found the one that could mean something to me: Issues you are consumed by--a strong passion or prolonged obsession.
Regardless of that stalker-esque phrase, I choose to relate it to my passion for being an Alzheimer's advocate.
I contacted the Alzheimer's Association soon after Jim was diagnosed with an Alzheimer's type of dementia.
They connected me to a support group.
Both the local chapter and the national Alzheimer's Association sent newsletters.
Through the newsletters, I learned about a walk in our hometown known then as the "Memory Walk." Jim and I registered for the walk and on walk day discovered we were the only ones from our town.
The next year, I became an Alzheimer's volunteer and coordinated the walk.
When my daughter-in-law and I tried to get corporate sponsors, we realized that people didn't know much about Alzheimer's.
They often referred to it as "old timers" disease.
They thought age caused it and it just happened to elderly people.
No big deal--just a part of growing old.
The first priority was to educate them that Alzheimer's was a degenerative brain disease.
I went to Washington, DC, for the Alzheimer's Forum for the first time in 2001.
By then, Jim had been in long-term care for a year.
We went to ask for $1 billion for Alzheimer's research and for legislation to help the families dealing with Alzheimer's.
It didn't take long for me to find out that most senators and representatives didn't know much more about Alzheimer's disease than the folks back home.
After much persuasive talk, we got a tiny fraction of our lofty goal.
This pattern was repeated year after year.
Sometimes we gained a small amount, other times we held steady, but a few times our funding was decreased.
A lot of things have changed since my first trip to DC.
As I look forward to my 19th trip next week, I know we will meet with legislators who know exactly what Alzheimer's is and how devastating it is to the families and to our government.
Our senators and representatives are important partners in the fight to end Alzheimer's.
Yes, we've won many battles, but now we need to win the war.
Current research funding for Alzheimer's is beyond our wildest dreams of nineteen years ago.
The National Alzheimer's Plan was passed in 2012 to find an effective treatment or cure by 2025.
It seemed like we had plenty of time to meet our goals, but time has gone by with promising treatments falling short of the target.
We must fund successful research and break through the ring of fire that separates Alzheimer's disease from a cure.
In the meantime, we need to surround caregivers and persons with dementia within a circle of love and caring.
Before Johnny Cash recorded "Ring of Fire," he had a dream of the mariachi horns.
He made his dream come true by taking action.
Well, I have dreams too, and I plan to take action at the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum on April 2.
Copyright (c) March 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 11, 2019>
Well, yesterday we made the big switch to Daylight Saving Time.
At my age, any change isn't easy, and I sure miss that hour.
It seems as if time goes by quicker each day.
I only have my Christmas decorations as far as the landing, waiting to go into their storage boxes.
My snowmen are still sitting on the ledge although, gee, it hasn't snowed in a week.
Our first almost-spring rain melted the last of the snow in the yard as long ago as yesterday.
Where has the time gone?
St. Patty's day is less than a week away and Easter is on the horizon.
I believe that it is the busyness of life that hides more hours than the one we lost between Saturday and Sunday.
Juggling several projects at one time means I'm constantly putting out fires.
Sometimes, I make progress and feel like I'm attacking the fires with a high-pressure fire department hose.
More often than not, I look at the growing to-do list and might as well be beating back the flames with a gunnysack, and one that isn't even wet.
Where has the time gone?
I look at the year 2019 and realize how vividly I can remember events of fifty years ago.
This is the year of a golden anniversary that will never happen.
Jim's life was cut short by an Alzheimer's type of dementia--a disease I had never heard of--corticobasal ganglionic degeneration.
CBGD is a rare disease that attacks the cerebral cortex and the basal ganglia in the brain.
The onset usually occurs between the ages of 45 and 70 with an average duration of six or seven years.
After he looked at Jim's autopsy report, his neurologist explained that CBGD is a movement disorder.
Initial symptoms are usually difficulty walking because of stiffness, shakiness, or balance problems.
This is usually followed with problems with speech and comprehension.
For some reason, Jim's earliest noticeable symptoms were with memory and speech.
Early in the disease, he developed aphasia from the damage to his brain.
He had trouble speaking and understanding words.
Jim also had alien limb syndrome, especially in his right hand.
He had to have his little finger amputated due to infection cased from clinching the hand he forgot how to use.
He also had ideomotor apraxia (IMA) that resulted in his feet appearing to stick to the floor causing him to lose his balance.
I was relieved to learn that CBGD is almost always sporadic and not inherited.
A variant in the tau gene is associated with a predisposition to CBGD, meaning it can occur more often in some families.
However, not all people with CBGD have the tau gene variant, and not all people with the variant develop CBGD.
Jim passed away in 2005 after ten years of living with CBGD.
Next month marks the fourteenth year anniversary of his death.
Where did the years go?
Sometimes, it seems a different lifetime, a different me.
Other times, it takes my breath away as the realization that he is forever gone batters my heart anew.
The pain is physical in those moments and I can almost feel life slipping away.
How did seconds turn into minutes, and minutes into hours?
How did twenty-four of those hours turn into days?
How did the days turn into years?
How many years will you and I have in a lifetime?
The questions remain the same, but the answers are the biggest mystery of all.
Copyright (c) March 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 3, 2019>
The typical Missouri weather forecast called for a possibility of ice on Memory Day.
The night before, Jessica and I held a text discussion trying to decide how early we had to leave to make it to the Capitol on time.
To complicate things, the Capitol Building was undergoing renovations and only one entrance was open.
My husband watched me busily texting, as I told him the various times under consideration.
"Well, we decided to leave at 8:00," I said.
After I put the phone down, he asked, "Where are you meeting?"  "Well, since we didn't decide anything different, I assume we will meet at the same place we meet every year." About that time, Jessica sent another message.
"We didn't decide where we were meeting." After all our weather worries, the ice stayed away, and we had an uneventful trip to the Capitol.
Soon we met with other purple clad advocates.
We made new friends and reunited with advocates we had met previously.
Several hugs later, we split up into teams to visit our senators and representatives.
Jessica, Mark, Samantha, and I donned our purple sashes, put on our figurative advocacy hats, and set off to keep our appointments.
We had two asks this year: Fund Alzheimer's Grants for Respite and Pass the Structured Family Caregiver Act.
It was easy for me to support both bills wholeheartedly.
Every caregiver needs time away to refresh and rejuvenate.
The state of Missouri has awarded $450,000 in Alzheimer's Grants for respite for several years in the past, and we asked for the same amount again.
Of the Missourians receiving respite funds, 99% report they can keep their loved one at home longer.
By delaying nursing home placement by a mere two months, the state could save $2 million in Medicaid costs.
What a deal!
We also asked our legislators to pass the Structured Family Caregiver Act.
This pilot program offers a new option under Medicaid for full-time caregivers.
The caregiver would have the support of an in-home agency that would provide professional support.
The family would receive care planning, training, remote monitoring, and monthly visits.
The caregiver would receive a daily stipend to help relieve financial hardship.
The goal of this program is to keep persons with Alzheimer's and related dementia at home rather than in nursing homes.
The cost to the state would be about half the cost of a long-term care facility.
Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease in America for both the government and the families who care for loved ones with the disease.
The cost of incontinent supplies alone would strain the budget of a Medicaid eligible household.
Imagine the plight of a low-income family dealing with a high cost disease.
At the end of our visits, we attended the Memory Day Ceremony in the Rotunda.
Governor Parson talked about his personal experience with Alzheimer's and pledged his support.
Advocate Terri Walker spoke about receiving her diagnosis on her grandson's birthday.
Her well-spoken words had the power to touch our hearts.
Her youth, sparkling eyes, fabulous haircut, and lovely purple dress served well to strip away any preconceived stereotypes of the face of Alzheimer's.
Families dealing with Alzheimer's need our support, our hugs, and our advocacy.
Until we find a cure for Alzheimer's, I will continue to join other committed advocates at the Missouri Capitol and on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C.
Copyright (c) March 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 19, 2019>
As I brought in groceries from my car, I looked like a bag lady.
I carried as many bags as I could to cut down on the number of trips from the garage to the kitchen.
Yesterday, I juggled four bags into the house and prepared to set them on the counter.
I manhandled the gallon of milk and a sack of cans onto the counter.
I lifted the lighter bag with a carton of eggs in it and prepared to set it beside the other bags.
The plastic bag slipped out of my hands and the eggs fell to the floor.
I heard a distinct splat and knew that some of the eggs had prematurely met a sad end.
I picked up the carton and at first glance, they all looked fine.
One by one, I plucked the eggs out of the carton and examined them.
Of the eighteen eggs, fourteen were broken on the bottom, but four had survived unscathed.
The eggs all suffered the same disaster and all the eggs were fragile.
It seems to me that the fate of the eggs is a life lesson.
Not one single person makes it through life without catastrophe.
Your struggles are different from mine.
Your heartaches, failures, insecurities, relationships, health problems, and worries are different.
Everything that happened in your life--good and bad--made you the unique person you are.
Your ability to overcome adversity determines whether you are a survivor and not a victim.
I've noticed that ninety-nine things can go right, but the one thing that goes wrong will haunt me.
I can remember how hyped I was when the Alzheimer's Association chapter office decided to give Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love to our state legislators.
I had collected stories from caregivers and persons with dementia, and the chapter staff chose the best stories to include in the book.
I spent about a year on the project and invested my energy into editing these heart-felt stories.
I was recognized on the floor of the Missouri house and received a House Resolution from my representative.
What should have been one of the happiest days in my life was ruined when a fellow advocate met me in the hallway.
"If my chapter hadn't told me to give away this book, I wouldn't have because..." She went on to say something that wasn't true.
I tried to show her where she was mistaken, but she wasn't interested in what I had to say.
She had already made up her mind and didn't even hear me.
That one negative comment stung, and I came close to deciding in that moment that I wasn't going to publish any more books.
It's obvious that this one negative Nelly did not change the trajectory of my life.
I overcame my self-doubt and began blogging shortly after this experience.
The day I started my blog, I thought long and hard before pushing that "publish" button.
One of the biggest hurdles to overcome if you want to leave the past behind is self-doubt.
We all fail and fall short of our aspirations.
If you notice someone who apparently leads a charmed life, just know that appearances can be deceptive.
Survivors are often broken people who pick up the pieces and glue them back together.
Human survivors may look fine on the outside, but inside, they hurt from unhealed wounds.
I cracked one of those "survivor" eggs into the skillet this morning.
The egg looked perfect on the outside, but the yolk was broken and it was scrambled on the inside.
Copyright (c) February 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 9, 2019>
I had so many events on my calendar this week that I was on the verge of overload meltdown.
I had appointments, two meetings that I needed to prepare for, a luncheon I couldn't attend because of a conflict with the other two meetings, a conference call, and music practice.
The weather was fine on Monday, one appointment finished, check.
On Tuesday, due to a predicted ice storm, one of the Thursday meetings was cancelled, check.
Wednesday, the ice came.
Every tree, shrub, and blade of grass turned to silver.
I couldn't step out of the door because of solid ice.
I had taken a hard fall on the ice several years ago, so safety first!
My dog had to stay within the bounds of her 25-foot leash.
She slid on the concrete drive and gingerly stepped on the grass.
Each blade was an ice-covered prong that affected her balance and distracted her from her daily routine.
Wednesday night, the weather alert radio went off.
In addition to our ice alert, severe thunderstorm warnings were issued.
Before long, we had high winds, pouring down rain, thunder and lightning.
This is Missouri after all.
Another meeting cancelled for Thursday, check.
Conference call and luncheon cancelled, check, check.
Practice cancelled for Friday, check.
Thursday morning, the power went out for a few hours.
After daylight, I noticed the tree in the front yard was mostly laying on the ground.
The sun came out for a few minutes and the ice, though treacherous, turned our yard into a silver wonderland.
Since my responsibilities had been cancelled for the day, I read, played my computer game, and took a nap.
Time for myself, check.
Although in the past, I often ignored weather alerts, it seems that our meteorologists are more accurate now.
In this case, the prediction of ice, our silver alert, was spot on.
Weather isn't the only thing that can be predicted with accuracy.
Silver alerts for missing, vulnerable adults will be needed throughout the United States.
Six out of ten people with dementia wander, and Jim was one of those who seemed to be seeking something that was in a different place than where he was at the time.
Indicators that predict wandering: a person who paces, exhibits repetitious behavior, forgets how to find familiar places, is gone longer than necessary when going for a walk or driving, gets anxious when in crowded stores or malls, or keeps looking for an undefined object.
I know that when Jim wandered off, there was a fine line between checking where he usually went and panicking because I couldn't easily find him.
Everyone in our neighborhood knew to call me if they saw Jim walking alone.
We installed alarms on the door, enrolled him in Safe Return, and tried to be vigilant at all times, but he still managed to wander off.
He wandered off in an airport, Silver Dollar City, a mall, from a cabin on vacation, and other places too numerous to mention.
You should look no more than fifteen minutes before you enlist professional help.
I notified security at the mall and at Silver Dollar City.
If no official security is available, call 911 and file a vulnerable adult missing persons report.
The authorities will help you find your loved one and can issue a silver alert.
If your loved one is enrolled in the Medic Alert + Alzheimer's Association Safe Return(r), you should notify them at 800-625-3780.
When you are aware of a Silver Alert, share the information on social media.
The more people who are looking, the more likely the missing person will be found safely.
Silver Alerts have a high success rate!
If you are a caregiver, it is easy to be overwhelmed with the responsibility of looking after the safety of your loved one.
Squeeze in some precious time for yourself.
It is amazing how one day, one hour, or even thirty minutes can re-energize your body and spirit.
Copyright (c) February 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 30, 2019>
After nine days of bitter, cold weather and gloomy skies, I walked the dog outside and wondered...what is that bright shiny object casting shadows upon the earth?
I welcomed the rays of sunshine and the tiny amount of warmth it psychologically added to the day.
I immediately thought of how lately I'd heard the idiom "bright shiny object" to describe people who have risen quickly in the world of politics.
In other words, they are saying these young, energetic politicians are charismatic but not long lasting or particularly useful.
Sometimes older workers can have this same attitude toward new employees.
When I found a job at the electric cooperative, I was the youngest person in the office.
My job was to learn how to operate that new fangled computer.
A minority of the employees were suspicious of me because they thought I was hired so they could be replaced with a machine.
I was a bright and shiny object in their world, and they would have liked nothing better than to sandblast the shine.
Fortunately, most employees thought I was useful and non-threatening, and they polished the shine.
I came to know and love my co-workers as family, and they inspired me to be a polisher rather than a sandblaster.
I am happy for my friends and family when they succeed.
Life is tough enough without sandblasters purposely trying to take someone down.
To refer to someone as a bright shiny object should never have been a derogatory term.
The definition of bright means "full of light." I believe that Alzheimer's caregivers are full of light.
They've had their lives sandblasted by a devastating disease, but accepted the responsibility and challenge of caring for loved ones.
Research shows that Alzheimer's caregivers provide more hours of care and a higher level of assistance with activities of daily living than caregivers for persons without dementia.
One in three Alzheimer's caregivers reported that their own health deteriorated.
Yet, each year, more than 16 million family and friend caregivers provide more than 18 billion hours of care for their loved ones with dementia.
Shiny has two definitions that I thought noteworthy--(1) worn or rubbed smooth, (2) reflecting light.
Alzheimer's advocates are often caregivers or former caregivers.
Advocates can be worn slick from years of caregiving, but they get the importance of advocacy.
Some are a voice for their loved ones with dementia, but others are the voices of persons living with dementia.
Becoming an advocate is a positive reaction to a negative situation.
The Alzheimer's Impact Movement (AIM), the advocacy arm of the Alzheimer's Association, has driven policymakers to address the crisis of Alzheimer's disease.
AIM advocates have diligently worked for years to bring national awareness of Alzheimer's disease and increased research funding.
An object is a goal.
The ultimate goal is to find a cure for Alzheimer's, so that future generations will eventually forget the wreckage Alzheimer's leaves in its wake.
The Alzheimer's Association is the largest worldwide non-profit funder of Alzheimer's research.
The NIH (National Institutes of Health) has steadily increased their Alzheimer's funding.
A worldwide effort to end Alzheimer's disease adds to the hope that a cure will be discovered sooner, rather than later.
These bright shiny objects have staying power and are extremely necessary in the fight against Alzheimer's.
Caregivers overcome adversity to be full of unconditional love and light, advocates reflect the light and take AIM at engaging policymakers to make Alzheimer's a priority, and researchers seek a clear and obtainable goal to end Alzheimer's.
The clouds roll in again, and I wonder where is that bright shiny object that brings light and life to the world?
The clouds may hide it from view, but it steadfastly shines, patiently waiting to burn through the gloom to brighten the world with hope.
Copyright (c) January 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 20, 2019>
I took my dog out yesterday in forty mile an hour winds.
Well, sometimes I took her out and other times, I huddled behind the glass storm door.
I opened the door a crack to tug on her leash, and the wailing wind reminded me of nights at my grandma's house when I was a little girl.
As I huddled in a feather bed beneath quilts that weighed more than I did, I could hear the whistle of the north wind as it whipped around the house and through the ill-fitted windows.
This morning during breakfast, my husband and I talked about poverty.
I said, "I never worry about being poor, because I've been there and it doesn't scare me." "You know, we don't really need most of the stuff in this house.
We could live without cell phones, Dish Network, fancy TV's, iPads, Kindles...," he said.
After our discussion, I began to think about how life was so much simpler when I was growing up.
Playtime didn't involve deciding which toy to choose, because I didn't have many.
Instead, I would decide which tree to climb.
It wasn't hard to choose what to wear.
I had two choices--one of my three or four school dresses, or the old clothes I wore at home.
When I was little, I had two pair of shoes (school and play), and in the summertime, I went barefoot most of the time.
No one had heard of Alzheimer's.
When my elderly great-aunt developed dementia, folks just said she was "slipping." We kids enjoyed her childlike behavior and loved her unconditionally.
After Jim and I married, we had a black-and-white 19-inch TV.
We struggled to pay the bills, lived in rental houses, and bought clothes at garage sales, or I made them.
For several years, we didn't even have a phone because it was an extra expense.
We had one old car after we sold the other to pay my hospital bill when my son was born.
We never obsessed about being poor.
Just like my folks, we never resorted to food stamps, government assistance, or borrowing money to help us through the lean times.
Instead, we saved all we could, so we could make it on our own.
Life was simpler and people were kinder.
We didn't have politics shoved down our throats twenty-four hours a day.
We voted and then let it go until the next election.
We didn't have our friends and family insulting our intelligence on Facebook every day because we made different political choices.
If someone mentioned a tweet, we'd have been looking for a bird.
Our social activity was visiting with family and listening to their foot-stomping country music.
We went to a laid-back country church on Sunday.
Family relationships were cherished, and we would never deliberately be unkind or critical of them.
Jim's mom always said, "If I have food on the table and a roof over my head, I'm content." Simple goals, important goals, considering she had temporarily lived under a tree, more than once, and under a bridge at another point in time.
She never felt homeless and as long as she was surrounded by family, their love shored her up and made her fearless about poverty.
No, poverty doesn't scare me.
Sitting around the old oak table drinking home-squeezed lemonade seems much more appealing that working my butt off trying to keep up with all my obligations.
This morning, when I took the dog out for her morning walk, I told her, "Yesterday's wind is gone, just like the simple times." She stopped, tilted her head, and had that look on her face that indicated she thought I was maybe, just maybe, talking about the treat in my pocket.
Copyright (c) January 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 11, 2019>
Although I'm a declutter class dropout, I've been tackling the piles of storage tubs in my basement.
A person my age has a long time to accumulate a wide variety of items.
I've filled a half dumpster of old paperwork, things I just don't want anymore, worn outdated clothing, and worthless souvenirs.
The process is slow, but I don't want to resort to the strategy a friend of mine used when she sorted through her deceased husband's storage boxes.
She spent weeks going through his things, but finally decided to dump the rest without looking inside the boxes.
I don't fault her for this at all.
The hardest part of decluttering is knowing what to throw away, knowing what to keep, and how to dispose of the rest.
In the midst of wondering why I hadn't thrown mountains of stuff away years ago, I've found unexpected treasures.
I found a lost photo of Jim holding his M-16 in Vietnam.
I found a box of ribbons for our Alzheimer's Walk Committee's participation in parades.
I found a box of magazine and newspaper articles I'd saved but hadn't put in the scrapbooks from the five years that I coordinated the "Memory Walk."  Recently, we found a scrapbook my husband's mom had made with photos of family members with neatly handwritten captions.
I considered it a real treasure.
His cousins dropped by for a visit, and I showed the scrapbook to them.
My husband, an only child without children of his own said, "Nobody is going to want this when I'm gone." Therein lies the dilemma.
Our generation's treasure is trash for the generation following us.
Although my kids value some mementos, they have no room in their homes for all my stuff, especially things that mean nothing to them.
Along with the items in the basement, I have several collections.
Some have at least garage-sale value and others, well, not so much.
I floated the idea that my kids should hold my memorial services at Christmastime and give everyone attending a nutcracker.
"Give the big ones to people that I don't like," I said.
My daughter-in-law quipped, "Gives an entirely new meaning to 'parting gift.' " The best thing to come out of my treasure hunt was finding one of Jim's guitars that had been in a "hidey-hole" for the past eighteen years.
I gave it to my brother to use for as long as he wants.
We practiced the songs for our monthly nursing home gig and for my mom's birthday party.
It really warmed my heart to see someone playing Jim's guitar.
When my brother sang "Sing Me Back Home," I told him that the guitar could probably play that tune by itself.
"Maybe that's why it sounded so good this time," he said.
Going through the clutter, has been a time of remembrance of good times and hard times.
Of course, now I must press on to get past that stage of mass chaos.
One of my motivations is the thought that someday someone may just dump the storage tubs into a dumpster without looking at the contents.
Copyright (c) January 2019 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 30, 2018>
In college, I took an accelerated class on Office programs, and it was no surprise that our tests were computerized.
As many of us know, there may be more than one way to come up with the correct answer, but we had three tries to come up with the "preferred" computer chosen method.
"The test is only going to have one correct answer, so if the way you do it the first time doesn't work, try something different!" This could well be a life's lesson.
During the time I was a caregiver for Jim, I lived and breathed the lesson of trying something different.
It became my mode of survival.
It seemed that each day brought about some of the same challenges and piled on new ones.
You would think it would be easier as you learned what worked with the old ones, but the solution bar kept changing for the old ones along with the new ones.
I documented these challenges and began to put them into a memoir Indelible.
I had a rough draft finished  a decade ago, but put it aside.
I resumed the project in September 2016 with hopes to have it finished by the end of 2017.
Instead, here it is a year later, and I still have work to do.
In the book, I share some brief glimpses into everyday challenges of having a husband with dementia.
These flashes of reality could be thought of as verses.
These stories, some short, some longer, make up chapters.
Eventually, when the words come together in a coherent manner, it will become a non-fiction book.
.
The book has taken a back burner to all the other distractions life has thrown at me.
Many mornings I wake up with intentions to work on the book, but first, I have to tend to all those other obligations, all the immediate things that must be tended to, and the dread of what's coming down the pike.
As we close in on the new year, most of us take a moment to reflect on the year just about to trot into the sunset of the past.
As we close the chapter of 2018, I'm more than ready to open a new one in 2019.
Too often, I've made the mistake of trying to be a people pleaser, and that means some of them have stolen my pleasure.
Worse yet, they've stolen my time.
I plan to move into the new year without resolutions, but with the resolution that the same old problems aren't going to be approached in the same old way.
Sure, I'll still make mistakes and take the wrong approach, but maybe by the third try, I'll get it right.
Who knows, maybe 2019 will be an Indelible year.
Copyright (c) Dec 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 22, 2018>
Jim and Linda, Hawaii, 1969 We had our family Christmas get-together the second week in December.
The following Friday, we had our final practice session for the December nursing home gigs.
On the way home, I stopped at Walmart to pick up a few essential items.
I walked into the store and stopped in my tracks.
Why did they still have all that Christmas stuff out?
After my initial shock, I realized that Christmas was still more than two weeks away.
It is no wonder I wouldn't remember what day it was.
My husband and I have been working on migrating our websites to a new server since the first of the month.
The project is so fraught with problems, we've been working practically non-stop.
"My brain is mush," I told him.
I had been trying to write a note about the umpteenth way to approach a failure and noticed I was making letters backwards and out of place.
My brain would not process how it was supposed to look.
It made me think about Jim in the early stages of dementia.
I wrote about it in Indelible, a memoir in progress.
Jim began to have difficulty writing.
He would write letters but they wouldn't make words.
Most of the time, the combination was close enough that I knew what he meant.
I wanted him to feel useful and to "exercise his brain." One morning, I was washing the breakfast dishes and Jim was sitting at the table.
"Honey, would you make a grocery list for me?" I nodded toward the pad and pen I'd placed on the table.
"We need paper towels," I said.
He picked up the pen and wrote on the notepad.
"We need milk," I said.
He set the pen down.
"I don't want to." He walked out of the room and I sat down to finish the list.
On the paper, he had printed, "taper powels."  Later he picked up the list and studied it carefully.
"I wonder why I spelled 'paper towels' that way," he said.
If not for the date displaying on my phone and PC, I would be completely lost as to day and time.
Still, even those reminders aren't enough when my mind is on overload.
A few days ago, I looked at the date and noticed it was the day Jim and I married in 1969.
I had a complete meltdown, then had to pull myself together to try to make it through the day.
My mom called and our music was cancelled.
I was torn between having more time to help with the migration project and disappointment that I wouldn't be able to lose myself in the calmness of playing the ukulele.
I had planned to go to the funeral of our third family member to die within the last thirty days.
I would have been there, except for some strange reason, I thought the funeral was Saturday.
We played music Friday, and I never sat down to read the paper until late.
I saw the funeral notice and my heart sank when I realized I had missed it.
Soon it will be a new year and a time of promise.
I look forward to getting back on track and living the retirement dream.
I look forward to a time when the outside stress and pressure subside, and the drama ends.
I'll be glad when life gets back to normal.
I think I need one of those shirts or mugs that say, "This too shall pass.
It might pass like a kidney stone, but it will pass."  Copyright (c) Dec 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, December 13, 2018>
We recently held a raffle as a fundraiser for our Walk to End Alzheimer's.
At our celebration, we had an ugly sweater contest.
I have a few Christmas sweaters that would classify as ugly, but I really don't remember where I stashed them, and I've been too frantically busy to find them.
I looked at a few stores where they definitely had butt ugly sweaters, but I was not inclined to spend $40 for a sweater so ugly, I'd only wear it once.
I had already cancelled out of one party, and I was in such a funk that I just didn't know if I was even going to make it to this one.
Finally, a few hours before the Alzheimer's Walk party, I breezed into Walmart and looked at several sweaters so ugly they were kind of cute--in an odd sort of way.
I chose five sweaters and took them to the dressing room.
It was important that the sweater fit because I was down to the wire and certainly didn't have time to exchange it.
I put the sweaters on a hook and one started flashing.
It took me a few minutes to find the off switch.
I finally got a good look at the sweater that was flashing and knew it was the one.
It said, "I'm having a meltdown." Ah, perfection.
This entire season has been one big meltdown for me.
I'm to the point where I don't want to go to bed at night, and I don't want to get up in the mornings.
I've decided it 'tis the season to be grumpy.
I've felt like an ugly sweater inside and out, and this one told the story of the past six months.
Sometimes it's hard to decide whether my knee or my head hurts more.
I feel like crawling into a shell and pulling my head inside like a nervous turtle.
I went an entire week without going out of the house except to walk the dog.
The season of Ho-Ho-Ho, is more like bah-humbug.
There's nothing like losing two family members to take the jolly out of the holiday season.
On the positive side, my house is as decorated as it's going to get for the holidays.
We finally found a mutually agreeable date for our annual family get-together.
Now that two of my grandchildren are all grown up, we have a lot of working adults with schedules to coordinate.
We had eliminated all weekends in December, but a Christmas miracle cleared up a day this upcoming weekend.
When I turn on the trees and the fiber optic bear, it chases away the blues.
Now I need a little Christmas magic to give me back my stamina, enthusiasm, and optimism.
I would so much rather have a white Christmas than a blue one.
Oh, and that sweater...turns out that I kind of like it.
I combined the "ugly" sweater with a Santa hat, a "rosy the riveter" scarf, fingernails painted in five bright Christmassy colors, one red and one green earring, and I found some of that good old holiday cheer.
The flashing lights helped temper the "Meltdown" message.
Copyright (c) Dec 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 5, 2018>
I've always liked a good mystery, and life is always serving up new ones to give inquiring minds a workout.
I was talking to my mom and she said today had been a long day.
I was thinking the same thing this morning when I thought it was afternoon and it was only 11:30 a.m.
Some days seem longer than others do, although according to the clock, they are all the same.
I would consider that one of the mysteries of life.
Today, the blackbirds were back again.
They covered the yard and the fields.
As far as I know this has happened twice.
Since the snow melted, and we are supposed to get another one today, I thought maybe they were like all the people who storm Walmart when bad weather is predicted.
It's a mystery why everyone is out of bread and milk right before a storm.
I know my mother-in-law always said that deaths happen in threes.
It really does seem to be true.
When two other people in the family die, I start being more cautious.
When I go outside at night, I look at the heavens and think how mysterious it is.
The planet, stars, moon, and UFO's leave me breathless.
Watching a meteor race across the sky leaves me wishing for more knowledge and a better understanding of how the universe works.
Another mystery to me is why some people seem to live charmed lives while others struggle every day.
Why do people get life-threatening diseases like Alzheimer's, ALS, or cancer?
Why do some people have to live with autoimmune diseases, diabetes, kidney failure, and a multitude of other ailments?
It would be easier to understand if good people didn't get bad diseases.
Why do some people have talents that others totally lack?
It's a mystery to me how some people can be so artistic while another might be a math wizard but can't draw a stick figure.
I never could understand how Jim could play and sing a song he'd heard only a few times.
Where does that innate ability originate?
I can't solve that one.
I think one of the biggest mysteries is dying.
Why do some people have slow, lingering deaths while others die peacefully in their sleep?
Why are some lives cut short while others go beyond quality of life?
You often hear people say life isn't fair, well length of life isn't fair either.
When Jim was dying, I felt heartache and anger.
I knew his death from dementia was inevitable.
He would have not wanted to live once his personality changed and his memories faded.
Jim had always treasured his memories, and it was sad to see them disappear into the broken links in his brain.
Still, it was heartbreaking to let go.
I've heard people often describe death as a blessing, but when it came to Jim, that is one thought that never crossed my mind.
Dementia stole a lot from us.
One of the things I missed the most after dementia was our conversations.
We talked about ghosts, UFO's, love, fear, heartaches--anything about life and death.
Jim was never afraid of dying.
He always said that death was closing one door and opening another.
Life after death was a mystery he wasn't afraid to solve.
The mystery we should all strive to attain is how to make the most out of the time we have on earth.
My goal is to live a drama-free life and not allow others to steal my joy.
When I leave this world, I want to leave more than I take.
Copyright (c) Dec 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 22, 2018>
November is a time for self-examination and giving thought to our many blessings and giving thanks where thanks are due.
Many of my Facebook friends have been posting one thing they are thankful for each day this month.
I've never participated in this delightful idea, but felt compelled to complete my monthly list in one fell swoop.
I made the list and entered it into One Note on a sleepless night.
After reviewing the list, I realized that I don't remember seeing any of these items on their lists.
I always suspected my thought processes might not be the same as the average person, but until now, I've kept some of the weirdness under wraps.
I am thankful for... 1.
Mice.
It's easy to think of mice as pesky rodents with no purpose in life other than leaving droppings behind furniture and chewing up important papers.
But mice are extremely important when it comes to medical research in general and Alzheimer's research in particular.
2.
Sleepless nights.
On sleepless nights, my brain goes into creative overdrive.
My best ideas come to me in the middle of the night.
3.
Wishes that didn't come true.
Throughout my lifetime, I've made a lot of goofy wishes, and I'm so thankful that they didn't come true.
I don't think the life of a fairy princess, a rock star, superhero or being married to Paul McCartney is what God had in mind for me.
4.
People who hurt my feelings when I was young.
Yep, all those cruel kids made me into a rhino-hide adult.
It is almost impossible to hurt my feelings, because frankly I don't give a poop about what insensitive, rude people say to me.
5.
Failure.
I've learned more from my failures than I ever learned from my successes.
Let's face it, when I make really bad mistakes, I try hard to not do it again.
6.
Not being beautiful.
Being beautiful is a burden I wouldn't want to carry.
Besides, I had to work a lot harder on my personality.
7.
Hard times.
There have been times in my life when it was a challenge to figure out how to pay the bills, feed the kids, and not have too much month left at the end of the money.
Because of  hard times, I've never had that fear of being poor that some people have.
Been there, survived, and know that happiness isn't based on the size of my bank account.
8.
Hard work.
Without years of hard work, I wouldn't have done as well in my job as I did and wouldn't be looking forward to retirement.
9.
Having my heart broken.
If a few boys hadn't broken my heart when I was younger, my life would have turned out differently.
I'm happy with the way it turned out, so thank you for breaking my heart and forcing me to move on.
10.
Rainy, gloomy days.
When the rain falls and the sun is elusive, it is a perfect time to sleep in and laze around reading a book.
11.
Boredom.
My life is so hectic that if I find time to be bored, I can relax...or think of something totally fun to do.
12.
Hunger.
When I'm hungry, I know I haven't overeaten.
13.
Paying bills.
When I pay bills, it means I have another month of electricity, internet, phone service, and a zero balance on my credit cards.
14.
Not winning the lottery.
I've always known that winning the lottery would screw up my life, and I like it the way it is.
15.
Flies and spiders.
When I'm in a murderous rage, I can squash a spider or swat a fly and not suffer an ounce of guilt.
16.
Clear packing tape and plastic wrap.
The way these two stick to themselves and trying to figure out how to get a roll started teaches me patience.
17.
Old age.
Without old age, I'd have to pay to get into ballgames and wouldn't get senior discounts.
18.
People who don't like me.
They teach me to stand up for myself.
19.
People who take advantage of me.
They keep me on my toes and help me say "no." 20.
Running late.
It's amazing how much time I'd waste waiting if I got to everything early.
Besides, I've avoided traffic tickets and dangerous driving when I decided it was better late than never.
21.
Anger.
If an injustice makes me angry, it means I am passionate enough to care.
22.
Fear.
I might not be alive today if I didn't have sense enough to be afraid from time to time.
23.
Ignorance.
Since I clearly don't know everything, ignorance means I always have something to learn.
24.
Grumpy old men.
Without them, grumpy old women wouldn't have anyone to argue with.
25.
Lousy TV shows.
When a lousy show is on TV, it is much easier for me to turn it off and do something productive.
26.
Bratty kids.
I'm so thankful that none of those bratty kids belong to me.
27.
Runny nose.
Without a runny nose, I'm sure my head would explode from the inside out when I have a head cold and infected sinuses.
28.
Thunderstorms and lightning.
We need the rain to replenish the earth and the lightning keeps me honest since I don't want to be struck down for telling a lie.
29.
Bad lab results.
Without bad lab results, I wouldn't have incentive to work toward being healthier.
I would have continued the same bad dietary habits with the same results.
30.
Uncertainty.
I don't know everything that is going to happen in my future!
Uncertainty keeps me optimistic that the best is going to happen and not the worst.
One of the great things about making a list like this is that it made me realize the thing I am most grateful for is living the life I want and wanting the life I live.
I am happy to be me and I don't envy anybody else's life or want to be somebody I'm not.
Copyright (c) November 2013 & 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 19, 2018>
After Jim developed dementia, he forgot the lyrics to most songs and had difficulty playing his guitar.
Eventually, he sang the same cowboy song repeatedly.
This song is so obscure I can't find the lyrics online, but I think the title is "I'm Telling You, Friend, I Ain't Had a Good Day." Maybe the reason this song stuck in Jim's brain was because of all the bad days he had.
The song is a warning even to friends about what a person feels like doing on a bad day.
I felt this song a lot when I was a caregiver, and I've been feeling it lately.
I don't want to take my anger and frustration out on anyone, but especially not on my friends and family.
Instead, I just internalize and feel sad and depressed.
Too many bad days are beyond our control.
When you receive a one-two punch in the face, the third one can be the knockout blow.
So, I binge on Hallmark feel-good, predictable movies.
I play games on my Kindle where I win some and lose some, just like real life.
Playing my ukulele makes me happy.
My granddaughter says it is a happy instrument, and I agree with that assessment.
I regret that I never learned to play an instrument while Jim was living.
I could have learned so much from him.
Maybe he could have taught me that song about a bad day.
Playing it on a happy instrument would have surely pointed out the absurdity of how we let things we can't control ruin a perfectly good day.
I sometimes have to remind myself of two yardsticks I used to get myself through the days of caregiving.
One measure was "so what." When Jim did something he shouldn't have done, I would ask myself "so what?" The day he stripped his clothes off in the front yard, my mother-in-law called me at work.
She couldn't get him to come in or put his clothes back on.
So what?
We lived in the country, there wasn't much traffic, and the weather was mild.
It took me fifteen minutes to drive home and solve the problem.
The other measure is "What difference will it make a hundred years from now?" So far, I can't think of anything.
Someone pointed out that without bad days we wouldn't appreciate the good ones.
I am thankful that I have a core trait of optimism.
I know that I'll come out on the other side with inward peace and outward calm.
In my lifetime, a few bad days are, ultimately, followed by a hundred good ones.
Copyright (c) November 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 16, 2018>
I went to Walmart on November 1.
The Halloween decorations were down, and the Christmas decorations were on full display.
After searching the store, I came across a small display of Thanksgiving decor.
Unfortunately, one of the important celebrations for our country has been mainly forgotten.
It seems that the only important thing about Thanksgiving weekend is Black Friday.
Wouldn't you know that my Google calendar has Black Friday on its list of holidays with the exact same emphasis as Thanksgiving?
It seems that not only has Thanksgiving been demoted, our seasons have as well.
We thought when we went from winter to summer without any sign of spring, that was a once-in-a-lifetime fluke.
Now, we've gone from summer to winter without more than a whisper of autumn.
We were sweating one week and dashing through the snow the next.
As I thought about the forgotten, I thought about people with dementia.
We think of those afflicted with dementia as being forgetful, but sometimes, their family and friends are the forgetful ones.
It's sad during this time of thanksgiving that thankless people abandon loves ones because "he won't remember me," or "I don't know what to say to her," or "grandpa keeps asking the same questions." Oh yes, it might be a little awkward at times, but that doesn't mean it isn't worth the effort.
These people were the first to be critical of families who remained a constant presence in their loved one's life.
It irritated me when someone asked why I provided personal care that the nursing home was "paid" to do.
I wanted Jim to have excellent care and as much time as I spent with him, there is no way that aides could spend that much time with one resident.
When I visited Jim in the nursing home, other residents thought I was there to see them.
I took time to talk to them, accept their hugs when offered, and to compliment them on a pretty blouse, or a new hairstyle.
I entered into their world and felt the anger they couldn't for the way their families had forgotten them.
At Christmas, an influx of visitors showed up with inappropriate gifts and criticisms of their loved ones care, surroundings, or the other residents they found to be annoying.
These visitors never came alone.
They missed the one-on-one time so important to the residents and replaced it with confusion.
When we think about the forgotten holiday, it is a time to remember the forgotten, forgetting people.
Be thankful that you can spend time with your loved one, you can hug them, and touch their warm, living hand.
The sad thing about Alzheimer's and other dementias is that the time will come when they are gone, and you will rue the time you threw away.
Time that could have been spent relishing that moment of clarity, the recognition that comes and goes, and the opportunity to go for a drive or a walk in the park.
I miss the times when Jim showed a glint of humor or understanding, the communication without words.
I miss holding his hand, giving him a shower, coaxing a smile, and stopping by Dairy Queen to get him a milkshake.
I miss the friends I made with resident's family members and the staff.
I miss the quirks of the residents.
Thanksgiving isn't so much a holiday as a way of life.
When we are thankful for the blessings we have, we don't let setbacks get us down--at least not for long.
A little bit of thankfulness goes a long way toward coping with the unfortunate circumstances that life generously sends our way.
Copyright (c) November 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 10, 2018>
November is designated as the month to raise Alzheimer's awareness and to honor caregivers.
I am going to focus on Alzheimer's caregivers.
Taking care of a person with Alzheimer's or other dementias is an all-consuming undertaking.
In the US, more than 16 million family members and friends provide unpaid care for their loved ones with dementia.
They provide 18.4 billion hours of unpaid care at a value of $232 billion.
About half of the unpaid caregivers provide care for four or more years.
Alzheimer's disease is called the "long goodbye" for a reason.
The average life expectancy after diagnosis is between eight and ten years, but some people live twenty years or more with the disease.
Diagnosis takes an average of 2.8 years.
Jim's diagnosis of an Alzheimer's type of dementia was the result of the process of elimination.
Especially at his age (49) an entire battery of test results were examined for a different cause for his confusion.
It was critical that we ruled out treatable conditions: drug interactions, vitamin deficiencies, thyroid problems, depression, and low blood sugar.
The emotional stress of caregiving is pretty much off the charts for 60 percent of the caregivers.
This emotion is followed closely by depression.
The entire process of caregiving was a ten-year rollercoaster for me.
We had good times, keeping our lives as close to normal as possible, followed by crisis after crisis, completing the downward spiral from end stages to the inevitable conclusion.
The object of this article is not to sugarcoat caregiving, but to bring awareness to how difficult it is to care for another person.
I had an exceptional amount of family and friends supporting Jim and me.
I was in my mid-forties, and that made me wonder--how could an elderly person provide care for a spouse without that support and without the resilience of a younger caregiver?
The long-term commitment of an Alzheimer's caregiver causes medical problems for the caregiver.
I was one of the caregivers guilty of not taking as good of care of myself as I should have.
My company required annual health fairs and my test results fell within the heart-attack-waiting-to-happen category.
I don't know if I would have made it through if I hadn't changed my ways about my own health.
If you are a caregiver, I urge you to take care of yourself from the beginning to the end.
Contact the  Alzheimer's Association and join a support group to learn from the experiences of others, to have an opportunity to vent, and increase your circle of friends.
Visit www.alz.org for vital information about strategies to help yourself and your loved one.
If you know a caregiver, don't abandon them.
Provide emotional support, include them in fun activities, and let them know that you love them.
Help them to the best of your ability to do so.
Caregiving is a marathon, not a sprint.
I urge family caregivers to never give up on life and happiness.
Find hobbies and social engagements that make you happy, and rid yourself of obligations that add to your stress.
Draw on your inner strength and spirituality to help you live life to the fullest.
Copyright (c) November 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 31, 2018>
Sunday, my sister-in-law Ginger and I spent a good part of the day at Walmart collecting for the Sedalia Walk to End Alzheimer's.
Our walk was in September, but since we fell short of our goal, we were trying to get a few more donations and "meet and greet" the shoppers.
We've set up outside Walmart several different times, but it's usually during the heat of summer.
In fact, we have a real talent for choosing the hottest day of the year.
This was a first for me--I wore a sweater.
The weather was sixty-ish, but the wind was gusty at times and just a steady strong breeze at others.
I lugged the table to the ideal spot and Ginger and I began our battle with the wind.
We struggled with taping down the tablecloth.
As soon as I set the collection jar on the table, the wind caught it and blew it down the sidewalk.
Finally, we had everything taped or weighted down.
We set out T-shirts, books, Dum-Dums for the kids, and informational brochures.
People couldn't decide how to dress for the weather.
We saw shorts, flip-flops, children with bare feet, sweaters, coats, dresses and high heels, boots, and a few who might have made the famous Walmart photo ops.
The time flew by as people stopped to donate and share their stories.
Many of them have traveled the same journey as I have.
A young woman told us, "My nana has it." Others: "My dad" or "My mom."  Another lady made a donation and said, "Thank God, no one in my family has Alzheimer's, but we do have friends that have it." One man wheeling a full shopping cart almost passed us by, but he stopped.
"Thank you for doing this," he said.
"I walked in Tennessee this year." I smiled.
"Thank you!" One man came up to us.
He reminded me of Jim because his hat was covered with colorful hatpins.
He chatted for a while, and then he said.
"I've been diagnosed with Alzheimer's." The T-shirts were popular items and I went back to my car several times to replenish the stock.
Just as we were thinking about closing down, a man wearing a suit walked up to us.
He made a donation, and we handed him a T-shirt.
"My mother died from Alzheimer's," he said.
He looked up at the sky and I saw the tears welling up in his eyes.
He began to talk about her and her faith in a better world.
The tears slipped down his face and he dried them with the T-shirt.
He talked about his family dynamics and the guilt his brother felt for not being there for his mom.
As he wiped tears, he said, "I'm sorry, I didn't mean to bring you down." "Hey, we've all been there," I said.
"Let me give you a hug."  We hugged in the way that those of us who have lost loved ones to Alzheimer's hug to comfort each other.
Then, he hugged Ginger.
As it usually happens when we fundraise for Alzheimer's--we find others who know the pain of watching a loved one fade away with this formidable disease.
As always, we share the hope that the end of Alzheimer's is nigh.
Copyright (c) October 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 26, 2018>
When we get ready to take our dog out in the mornings, she stops in the hallway if she hasn't heard us turn off the burglar alarm.
I always praise her for reminding me and avoiding  a call from the alarm service.
"I think she is a memory dog," I told my husband.
"What has she reminded you of this time?" Harold asked.
"Well, I came in and forgot to shut the garage door.
She just stood at the top of the steps and looked at me until I closed it." I figure at our age, we need a good memory dog.
People have guide dogs, hearing dogs, autism service dogs, seizure response dogs, diabetic alert dogs, PTSD dogs, allergy detection dogs, and mobility assistance dogs.
I couldn't help but consider how dogs could be used for persons with dementia.
Some Alzheimer's units have dogs and the residents can become quite attached to them.
In fact, the scuffle that caused Jim to be kicked out of a nursing home was over the dog.
According to Psychology Today, in 2014 two groups--one in Scotland and one in Israel-- trained dogs to assist persons with dementia.
Dogs are on a six-foot leash so they can lead their owner in an appropriate direction.
The dogs understand the command "home" to keep a person from being lost.
To assist caregivers, the dog's collar has a GPS navigational device that can be activated remotely.
The dog is trained to recognize the tone as a command to return home.
If a person leaves home without the dog, the dog can track by scent to find the lost person.
The dementia assist dogs are trained to recognize different tones to help a person "remember" daily tasks.
Different tones will instruct the dog to bring medicine in a bite proof bag with a note, lead the person to a cabinet to remind them to eat, drink water, or other personal care.
The dog also knows how to trip an alarm in case the person falls, chokes, or needs intervention.
In the United States, 4 Paws in Zenia, Ohio, trains Alzheimer's Assistance dogs.
Training an Alzheimer's Assistance dog costs between $40,000 - $60,000.
The family receives assistance with the cost of training.
Their website plainly states that if a person cannot be left alone, they should not be left alone with the dog.
The purpose of these dogs is to help the quality of life for the caregivers and their loved ones with dementia.
In addition to the assistance a dementia trained dog can provide, he is also a companion and walking the dog provides exercise.
Jim had several favorite dogs over the years, but I think Bubba had to be his all time favorite.
Although Bubba wasn't a trained dementia dog, he was a faithful companion.
Before he went into the nursing home, Jim walked Bubba and my dog Sherry almost every day.
Many of us have fur babies that become an integral part of our family.
Our pets help combat loneliness, but specially trained dogs have the potential to be lifesavers.
Sources:  https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/canine-corner/201401/assistance-dogs-alzheimers-and-dementia-patients https://4pawsforability.org/alzheimers-assistance-dog/ Copyright (c) October 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 11, 2018>
It is hard for me to leave home with all my paraphernalia in tow when I have more than one event on my daily calendar.
Last week, I had practice with the family band in a different county, immediately followed by watching my granddaughter perform with the high school band at a football game in yet another county.
I was gathering up my practice items (ukulele, Kindle, music stand, book with every possible chord, tuner, capo) and preparing for the football game (camera, jacket, bag to carry items).
As I put everything together, I looked at the stack and thought, Oh, yeah, something's missing.
I'll go to the closet and get it.
Except, when I got to the closet, I couldn't remember what I needed to get.
"Sometimes my memory fails me," I told my husband.
"I can't remember what I forgot." I looked at my watch and made a mad dash for the car.
If I left immediately, I wouldn't be pressed for time.
A couple of miles down the road, I called my mom to tell her I was on the way.
"Now, I remember what I intended to bring!" I said.
"I thought I would need a cap to keep the sun out of my eyes at the game." "I have one I'll send with you," she said.
"I'll be there in plenty of time," I said.
Well, those were optimistic words.
First delay was a wreck.
The second and longer delay was road construction.
I made it in the nick of time and my mom had figured out a strategy for me to make it to the game on time following practice.
I left my car in a convenient place so that I wouldn't have as far to drive to the game.
I met up with my daughter-in-law Stacey and rode to the game with her.
At the game, Stacey was helping push equipment onto the field, and I thought I'd do a camera check before the band began their performance.
I focused in on Stacey and the button wouldn't push down.
I tried several times, but nothing happened.
I looked at the screen and it said, "Memory card failed." Well, that was a new one.
The card I like to use was sometimes locked.
Of course, I only had my camera--the extra battery and cards were in the car.
I took the card out, put it back in.
Same message.
Again, and again.
Finally, success, and I snapped several good photos of my granddaughter dancing, twirling and tossing her flag.
Life certainly gets more complicated when memory fails--whether on my camera or in my brain.
Each of us counts on our memory to help us make it through the day.
Dementia impairs memory enough that a person cannot complete daily tasks.
Forgetting what I went to the closet to find caused an inconvenience, but it didn't keep me from doing the things I wanted to do.
I consider it a good sign that I eventually remembered my cap and found a substitute.
Without a resolution, my camera would have let me down at a time when I needed it.
I'm glad that I resolved the camera issue and that the memory problem was a temporary thing.
All it took was resetting the memory card.
Now, if only, I can find a way to reset my brain when it lets me down.
Copyright (c) October 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, September 28, 2018>
Whenever I buy eggs, I always open the carton and look at the eggs inside to make sure the shells are all intact.
Egg shells are fragile.
A cursory look will not always spot broken shells in the carton, and the last carton of eggs I bought had two broken eggs in it.
Since I don't want to get sick from eating a cracked egg, I threw the eggs away.
Those eggs will never reach their full potential.
They could have been scrambled, boiled, fried, poached, or used in a recipe.
Eggs are versatile; at least they are, if they are not broken before their time.
Sometimes, people are broken before their time too.
They can be broken mentally or physically.
Humans are remarkably resilient, while being fragile at the same time.
The mystery of why adversity makes one person stronger and breaks another is beyond my comprehension.
John D. Loudermilk wrote the country song "Break My Mind," a song about one of the ways people are broken--through failed relationships.
Minds can be broken by abuse, failure, humiliation, physical pain, loss, feeling trapped, feelings of not living up to expectations or potential, or PTSD from a past event.
Some people become depressed, which can lead to suicidal thoughts.
Jim suffered from PTSD caused by his tour of duty in Vietnam.
He dealt with depression and suicidal thoughts for several years.
I believe this brokenness was brought on by his experiences in the military and exposure to Agent Orange.
I also believe there is a connection between the effects long-term depression had on his brain and the dementia that would eventually be the cause of his death.
War doesn't just kill and maim people during combat; it has residual effects that change lives forever.
It makes some people stronger and breaks others.
The VA reports that the suicide rate is twenty-two percent higher for veterans than nonveterans.
Twenty veterans take their lives each day.
It took me a long time to realize that I couldn't make Jim's depression better.
I am thankful that he didn't commit suicide.
Considering the vulnerability Jim had while surrounded by a loving family, I can't imagine how dire the situation is for homeless veterans, or those set adrift because of alcohol and drug abuse.
In life, circumstances beyond our control can determine whether we live up to our potential or whether we lay broken and bruised.
Depression broke Jim's mind and dementia broke his brain.
Source: 2017 "VA Releases Veteran Suicide Statistics by State." https://www.va.gov/opa/pressrel/pressrelease.cfm?id=2951  Copyright (c) September 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 18, 2018>
Some people find it hard to write, but for some of us, not writing is harder.
Throughout my entire life, I've found writing to be a way to set my mind at rest, put things in perspective, and to, more importantly, move on.
Some of my friends and family, who had missed the hyperbole and drama, were floored when the social media queen left Facebook.
I assure you, physically, I'm healthy.
Emotionally, I'm a mess.
My heart is black with hurt and anger, my mind is spinning out of control for the things left unsaid.
It is not my story to tell, and I respect that.
Getting off social media has its downside, I'm not seeing the photos my brother is posting during his trip, I'm not interacting with my Facebook friends, and I have nowhere to post the beautiful sunset photo I took a few nights ago.
The upside is I'm avoiding the aggravation of the political uproar.
I have more time to read.
I'm catching up on all the chores set aside prior to our local Walk to End Alzheimer's.
We tackled the grass yesterday.
The rain had made the yard too soggy to use the tractor and we'd mowed what we could with the regular mower.
It finally dried up enough to mow with the tractor so Harold fired it up, drove out of the machine shed, and went to work.
I had trouble engaging my brain to figure out the sequence necessary to start the Bad Boy.
The most I could get was a click.
I thought that maybe the battery was dead.
I went outside to see if I could get Harold's attention, but he was already far away, and headed in the other direction.
I tried several different moves, and finally realized the blade was down.
Well, duh.
Mowing is a time to think, and my spinning thoughts made my eyes water, the words I wanted to shout made my throat hurt.
I had finished my part of the mowing and made a final swath down a bank through some too-tall grass.
As I turned to climb up the bank, I noticed the grass moving.
Curious, I stopped the mower and looked at the ground expecting to see a mouse or mole.
Instead, it was a baby rabbit bleeding out on the grass.
I cried for destroying the small, living animal who just happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.
This morning, I reminded myself of a person in the early stages of Alzheimer's.
I mixed up some biscuits to go with our leftover sausage gravy.
Harold set the timer, but instead of putting the biscuits in the oven, I set the pan on the countertop.
I bustled around taking care of other things, and about the time I poured an extra glass of milk, I realized the biscuits weren't exactly baking.
After resetting the timer, I put the biscuits in the oven and poured the extra glass of milk back in the jug.
The timer went off, I checked the biscuits, and closed the oven door.
I proceeded to set out the dishes, get the silverware, and totally forgot the biscuits.
When it crossed my mind again, I grabbed a mitt, opened the oven, and breathed a sigh of relief that they weren't charred.
After a few bites, Harold said, "These are the best biscuits you've ever made.
I love the little crunch on the bottom." "I like them too," I said.
"They remind me of Virginia's biscuits.
They always had that crunch."   Well, the biscuit story had a happier ending than the mowing story.
That's how life goes.
Life isn't fair and the good guys don't always win.
Sometimes, you feel like a perfectly baked golden brown biscuit, but other times you feel like you've been run over by a lawnmower.
Copyright (c) September 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 13, 2018>
Two-thirds of the 5.5 million Americans with Alzheimer's are women.
Why?
The most obvious factor is age.
Women have longer lifespans and are more likely to reach the age of highest risk.
Women worry more than men do about developing Alzheimer's, and with good reason.
A sixty-five-year-old woman has a 20 percent risk of developing dementia during her lifetime.
I don't know about you, but I'm not happy with those odds.
Being a caregiver for my husband was never a part of my vision of our life together.
Jim was decisive, a man of strong convictions, protective, creative, and loving.
Never in my wildest imagination could I have envisioned the turn our lives would take when he developed dementia.
And certainly, if an Alzheimer's type of dementia had entered my mind, I would have thought of him as an elderly man, not one who wouldn't live to see his sixtieth birthday.
The job of caregiver falls more often on women.
They are two and a half times more likely than men to provide around the clock care for a loved one who is in the late stages of the disease.
Female caregivers are daughters, wives, siblings, friends, and in younger onset--mothers.
In a study of caregivers, indications are that females are substantially more likely than males to provide intimate personal care for their loved one with Alzheimer's.
Female caregivers assume responsibility for bathing, dressing, toileting, and changing adult diapers.
Caregiving adversely affects women's employment.
Twice as many women as men give up their careers entirely to be caregivers.
Seven times as many women as men go from working full-time to part-time in order to be a caregiver.
I was in my forties when Jim developed dementia and worked full-time.
Quitting work wasn't an option for me.
There were times when the challenges of juggling a job and caregiving seemed overwhelming.
Jim required only about four hours of sleep at night, and I often went to work sleep deprived and emotionally drained.
To further complicate things, from time-to-time I would receive a phone call and have to go home to tend to the latest challenge--wandering, refusing to let someone else do something for him, or just to comfort him when he was scared or depressed.
Think about it--as a woman you are more likely to be a caregiver for a loved one with Alzheimer's, and then, after years of caregiving, you are more likely to develop the disease.
We women have a large stake in ending Alzheimer's.
Our brains matter to us, and we want to keep them healthy throughout our lifetimes.
We need to join together as women, as caring people, and as advocates to end Alzheimer's now.
Copyright (c) September 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 10, 2018>
When Mindy asked me if I wanted a tent for the Mozark Press sponsor booth at the Sedalia Walk to End Alzheimer's, I said, "Yes, it will provide shade." Last year, it was miserably hot.
Two days prior to the walk, the rain moved in.
Sometimes, it sprinkled; sometimes it poured.
The walk is rain or shine.
I was definitely hoping for shine, even hot shine.
The morning of the walk, I was encouraged, but still wore my waterproof snow boots and my "Memory Walk" purple rain jacket from fifteen or so years ago.
Volunteers and the committee showed up at the Highway Gardens before dawn to set up tents, and arrange tables and chairs.
I unloaded copies of Treasure Trove of Memories and put them on the table safely encased in their waterproof tubs.
Things were shaping up nicely--then, the rain came.
Registration began and an additional tent was set up near the registration table.
My team members started showing up, including my friend and fellow advocate, Jennifer, who had driven in from Jefferson City to walk in the rain with us.
A few team members watched my table when I went to greet Congresswoman Hartzler and her field representative, Rachel Gilroy.
Rain dripped from the Congresswoman's umbrella as I introduced her to family, volunteers, and Faith Bemiss, a reporter from the local newspaper.
During an interview, Vicky Hartzler talked about Alzheimer's research funding.
After talking about the increases approved by Congress, she told the reporter, "Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease in America."  I escorted Congresswoman Hartzler to the stage area.
As we were waiting for the presentation of the flag and the national anthem, I saw that WyAnn had her trophy, but mine was still in my car.
Our teams won the trophies from last year, hers for the biggest team, and Jim's Team for the best fundraising team.
I sent a text to my son who retrieved the trophy from the car.
Congresswoman Hartzler shared encouraging words with the walkers.
She spoke of her hope that a cure would be found in her lifetime.
During the ceremony, she held a purple flower in memory of her mother and mother-in-law.
The walk began and I looked for my team.
I found them, and realized the team banner was still in the car.
The walk was a short-cut of the short-cut that we had used in the past.
Most people headed to their cars while some of us started putting the tables, chairs, and tents back where they belonged.
This was my twenty-first walk and only the second time we had to walk in the rain.
I've never been so wet in my life outside of a bathtub.
The snow boots were great and never leaked.
I peeled off my jacket and climbed into my car.
My hair was plastered to my skull.
I couldn't remember where I'd put my comb so I fluffed it with my fingertips.
The difference between waterproof and water repellant became apparent.
My Grand Champion shirt, which was hidden the entire day, was soaked.
My jeans were soaked, but I wasn't too uncomfortable because my feet were dry.
The snow boots did the job!
Sometimes rain falls in our lives at the most inconvenient times, but rain is essential to life itself.
I certainly didn't blame the people who stayed home, but it was inspiring to see the ones who were compelled to come and walk.
It did my heart good to see those who smiled, hugged, and encouraged each other.
I walked for Jim.
I walked for all who have died from the disease.
I walked for the five million Americans living with Alzheimer's and their caregivers.
I walked for my kids, grandkids, and babies not yet born.
I walked for a world without Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) September 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 27, 2018>
I was up late last night, and the first thing I thought of when the clock moved past midnight was...It's Jim's birthday.
A lot has changed since Jim left this world thirteen years ago.
I wonder what he would think about how things are now.
I can only imagine how he would feel about some things, but I am sure of others.
I remember one time when I was feeling a little melancholy and worried about the mistakes I'd made as a parent.
I should have done this, instead of that.
I was too hard on the kids at times.
Jim just looked at me and said, "Well, we must have done something right." He was confident of their futures.
Our sons grew up to be good men, family men, married to the two best daughters-in-law that we could have ever wanted.
Jim would have been proud of his four grandchildren.
They are intelligent, of good character, and inherited the Fisher good looks.
Jim loved being a granddad, and I'm thankful that he enjoyed the three older grandkids, and it makes me sad that he never met our youngest grandson.
I'm sure Jim would like that I continue to live a happy, love-filled, and mostly healthy life.
Sure, sad things happen from time to time, but the moments we waste on regrets and sorrow takes away the time we have to enjoy our blessings.
I still miss Jim, and he sometimes comes to me in dreams and random thoughts.
I cling to the good times, the happy times.
I like to remember our trips to Colorado and Oregon and the happiness that those journeys brought Jim.
One time my mom said she was glad we took those vacations and trips when we did instead of thinking that would be something we could do in retirement.
I'm glad we did too, although at times, I was a reluctant traveler.
It fills my heart with gratitude that I was fortunate enough to receive Jim's endless love.
He would have wanted us to remember him with joy and laughter rather than with sadness.
As far as his birthday--true to his unselfish nature, he would have wanted us to be happy.
Copyright (c) Aug 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 24, 2018>
Yesterday, I was proofreading/editing on Jim's memoir, Indelible, and came across a story about picking up a Memory Walk T-shirt that my sister-in-law had made into a tank top for me.
When I read that, I realized I hadn't seen the shirt in years and doubted if I still had it.
Later in the afternoon, after doing some housework, I realized I'd worked up a sweat.
I went into the walk-in closet, lifted up some shirts stacked on a wire rack, and picked a white one to pull out from the middle of the stack.
It was the long missing tank top.
I don't know how many books I've read, or TV shows I've watched where someone says, "I don't believe in coincidences." What exactly is a coincidence anyway?
A coincidence is the occurrence of events that happen by accident.
It seems that lately in my life--coincidences rule.
At the Missouri State Fair, during one of the live acts I watched, the performers sang "Suds in the Bucket," a song we hear in line dancing exercise class.
This song was a hit for Sara Evans fifteen years ago!
Okay, so I'll admit that wasn't too odd.
The next day, Harold and I went to brunch at Golden Corral, and were the first two in the building.
While we were taking our plates to the buffet line, someone cued up the music.
"Suds in the Bucket" was the first song they played.
The last day of the Missouri State Fair, I needed to pick up some Alzheimer's brochures, my photos, and my granddaughter's drawing.
I decided to go to the fairgrounds early to pick up the brochures because I had to pick them up before six p.m.
The artwork and photos couldn't be picked up until 6:30.
Widespread rain was moving into the area and I wanted to limit the amount of soaking I would endure.
I'm sure it's just a coincident that even in the midst of a drought; it always rains during the fair.
For some reason, I decided to walk down a different street than usual.
I stopped to watch some horse-drawn carriages and moved on.
I decided to take a shortcut between two tents, and came face-to-face with my son.
Rob was hanging around to see if the races were going to be rained out.
Rob decided to go with me to pick up the Alzheimer's brochures.
Before  we had even moved from the spot, a man stopped and shook my hand.
"It's good to see you, Linda," he said.
It was a man I had served with on the Alzheimer's Greater Missouri Chapter board of directors.
You don't have to believe in coincidences for them to happen.
How many times have you been thinking about a song, and turned on the radio at the exact same time it was playing?
Or maybe you were thinking about an old friend, and she called you.
Have you ever had a sick feeling in your stomach that something bad was going to happen, and you find out later that something bad happened at the time you had the feeling?
Was it a coincident that Jim was a Vietnam veteran--was exposed to Agent Orange, suffered from PTSD, had clinical depression--and developed a rare dementia?
It could have been a coincident... Coincidences can be great surprises, life's little mysteries, or downright weird.
I know some people don't believe serendipity assumes a significant role in our lives, but I believe it does.
Sometimes, I think most of the pivotal events in my life have been the product of chance and coincidence.
Click here to support me in the Walk to End Alzheimer's!
Copyright (c) Aug 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 12, 2018>
I walked to the mailbox a few days ago and noticed that our apple tree had some apples on it.
Isn't that what apple trees are supposed to do?
Well, yes, but our apple tree had served as chow for the Japanese beetles again this year.
Last year, the tree didn't have any apples when the beetles finished eating the blossoms and made lace out of its leaves.
The apples seemed to me to be a symbol of strength.
They had faced potential destruction, but they survived.
I've heard people say you never know how strong you can be until being strong is the only option.
Sometimes, people surprise me.
I knew a shy, timid woman who when faced with a life-threatening disease showed amazing strength through a series of disappointing doctor reports.
I've also known people who give up at the first sign of a problem, and dissolve into a lengthy pity party.
Alzheimer's caregivers are, for the most part, notoriously strong people.
Caregiving can be overwhelming, frustrating, and extremely saddening.
Losing a loved one to a relentless, incurable disease is life changing for the family.
The person hardest hit is the one responsible for the well-being of the person with dementia.
A caregiver has to work her way through the grief and pick up the pieces of a life that has fallen apart.
He has to make a conscious choice to be strong and choose quality of life over quantity.
She has to make the tough decisions about finances, healthcare, and personal safety.
It takes strength to survive, and super powers to thrive.
Life after dementia becomes difficult, but not impossible.
It is important to take advantage of the early stages to continue living life as normally as possible.
Keep up activities that you and your loved one enjoy.
Jim and I used to enjoy playing pitch.
Uncle Johnny and I played Jim and Aunt Nita.
They were wild and crazy bidders and beat us on a regular basis.
At first, Jim could still play cards, but when it became too difficult for him, his mom helped him decide which cards to keep and when to play them.
With her help, he was able to enjoy the game long after he would have had to quit.
I even tried to play Super Mario Karts with him, but he laughed at me when I got my kart turned around backwards and told me, "You're going the wrong way!" As if I hadn't figured that out on my own.
I just couldn't seem to get my hands coordinated with my eyes.
Any day you can put your cares aside and recapture joyfulness is a good day.
It may be harder to have fun than it would be to sink into despair, but it is well worth the effort.
When adversity attacks our lives, we have to decide if we are going to be a leaf or an apple.
Click here to support me in the Walk to End Alzheimer's  Copyright (c) Aug 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 1, 2018>
Being a farmer, Harold knows a lot about plants.
One day we were out driving and I asked, "What are those pretty blue flowers alongside the road?" He gave me a quizzical look at my ignorance, and declared, "They are weeds!" I have a better appreciation of his assessment now than I did then.
After I started to help him mow our huge lawn, I noticed that before the grass needed mowing again, weeds popped up and ruined the smooth grassy surface.
Drought will turn our lawn brown, but the weeds grow in all their natural glory.
Like our lawn, life would be smooth and beautiful if the weeds of negativity, doubt, and frustration wouldn't crop up to complicate everything.
It is an individual decision whether we let the weeds take over or whether we keep chopping away at them until we can see the beauty again.
Caregivers battle weeds on a daily basis.
Most outsiders would think that the hardest part of caregiving would be physical caregiving tasks--feeding, bathing, changing adult diapers, and being responsible for another's wellbeing--but they would be wrong.
The hardest part of caregiving is working past the grief of losing a person you love by degrees.
While a caregiver loses his loved one to the world of dementia, he must cling to himself too.
It is not helpful to the caregiver or the person with dementia if the caregiver sacrifices his health to become immersed in his caregiving role.
I know it's hard to keep the doubts, negativity, and frustration at bay.
I often questioned if I could even find enjoyment as Jim's health declined.
Throughout ten years, I struggled to find some balance in my life.
It helped that I was still working because that allowed me to have a part of my life that hadn't changed as much.
Oh, I had to leave work from time-to-time to deal with one crisis or another, but still it provided respite from caregiving.
Being involved with the Alzheimer's walk and becoming an Alzheimer's advocate gave me a sense of accomplishment.
Out of a negative situation, I found purpose and positivity through my volunteer efforts.
The most painful time of my life changed me, took me places I would have never been, and introduced me to some of the most amazing people--other caregivers.
Life is no more or less than we make it.
Maybe it is my nature to view some weeds as pretty wildflowers.
Life offers endless beauty if we allow ourselves to believe in flowers and scoff at weeds.
Copyright (c) Aug 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, July 26, 2018>
A few weeks ago, I was driving home after a visit with my mother and as I topped a hill, I saw an oncoming car in my lane.
The state highway I was on had a shoulder that was every bit of one foot wide.
I braked and used all one foot of the shoulder, the kamikaze driver slammed on his brakes and slid back into his own lane with inches to spare.
I was scared, but I think I was mostly angry.
Those double yellow lines are on the highway for a reason: it is not safe to pass.
Part of the problem, especially on a road leading to the lake, is that people are in an all fired hurry to get to the lake so they can relax.
They don't seem to care how many lives they endanger.
If those aggressive way-over-the-speed-limit drivers would use some commonsense, a lot of car crashes would be avoided.
Why is it so hard for some people to stay between the lines?
Anyway, my point is that sometimes you have to stay between the lines.
We learned this in kindergarten when they gave us pictures to color.
Of course, coloring outside the lines didn't have life and death repercussions.
Most likely, you would have still gotten a golden star even if your paper had only colorful scribbles on it.
Throughout school, we had to think inside the box.
In order to pass our tests, we had to give the exact answer outlined in the textbook.
I can remember being so frustrated when multiple choice questions were worded in such a way that the correct answer wasn't the one you were expected to give.
One time in college, the professor handed me back my test.
"The answer you gave was correct, but it wasn't the one on the study sheet.
I was just being a butt by counting it wrong."  When we get a paying job, we are expected to think outside the box.
Maybe we don't do a task a certain prescribed way just because "that's how we've always done it." On the other hand, you don't want to rush into a bunch of changes to find out that your new way skips some vital steps.
For a caregiver to be successful, we need to know when to stay between the lines and when to think outside the box.
For example, I learned some of the best techniques of caregiving through the Alzheimer's Association.
I took advantage of all the seminars and training programs I could find.
I didn't have to use trial and error for everyday problems.
Others had paved the way, and I had endless resources at my fingertips.
There were times, though, when I had to think outside the box.
Actually, many, many times, especially, when trying to communicate with Jim.
He seldom spoke and had trouble understanding what I said.
I learned that body language and tone of voice were the best ways to help Jim understand.
My mantra for communications was "patience and flexibility." The biggest challenge when dealing with dementia is that each person is different.
A complete gamut of behaviors--aggression, anger, outbursts, sun downing, sleep issues, confusion, depression, wandering--are possible with dementia.
Not every person experiences all of these, but they are common.
Dealing with behavior involves thinking outside the box.
My best advice is to stay calm, focus on your loved ones feelings, and redirect when behavior is disturbing.
If one solution doesn't help, be flexible and try something different.
We used to have a saying in support group: If you know one person with dementia, you know one person with dementia.
No two people on this earth have lived the exact same lives or have the exact same experiences.
How dementia affects our loved ones will be the same in some respects, but different in others.
Sometimes it is wisest to stay between the lines, but thinking outside the box may be the best way to solve the unexpected twists and turns of dementia behavior.
Copyright (c) July 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 21, 2018>
I flipped my Irish perpetual calendar to a new day and saw this quote attributed to Emily Lawless, "Simple days bring simple joys." I couldn't agree more!
When I think back whether it was decades ago, or last week, I realize the simple times in my life were the happiest times.
I can close my eyes and remember those simple days.
In my childhood, I think of summer days on the creek bank with my bare feet dangling in the water while I read a book.
I  remember family reunions when I got to spend time with the Capps cousins and Saturdays at Grandma and Grandpa Whittle's house when my aunts, uncles, and Mom played their instruments and sang country and gospel songs.
We kids would listen for a while, dance, and then run out into the yard to play.
My life became more complicated during the teenage years, but was simple compared to today.
I wrote letters, listened to the Beatles with my friend Sharon, and fell in and out of love a few times.
Then, I met and married Jim.
Over the next two decades, we raised our sons.
Our weeks were quiet and weekends were spent with family--ours, mine, and his--often filled with jam sessions, fishing, campfires, and quality family time.
We celebrated special occasions by eating out or going to movies.
We traveled to Oregon, and discovered Colorado.
Later we made our trips to Branson to watch country music shows, visit Silver Dollar City, cruise on the Branson Belle, and Ride the Ducks.
Life took another turn when Jim developed dementia.
Our sons had families of their own, our fathers died, and we entered an unpredictable time.
Life started to get chaotic and I longed for the simple days.
Instead, my world revolved around Jim, work, and volunteering.
Anxiety became my constant companion.
Today, the simple days have vanished and been replaced with constant intrusions.
We are bombarded with demands on our time and invasions of our privacy.
We've become dependent on Google instead of memory.
Opinionated news has replaced facts.
Politics used to be relegated to election time, but now, we have it crammed down our throats on a daily basis.
People have become more contentious, politically polarized, more religious and less Christian.
Cell phones have replaced conversations with click, click, click.
We have to keep up with Facebook, Twitter, texting, breaking news, weather alerts, and dozens of other apps.
All the talk radio and politics of TV has many of us getting our news on our phones.
Even though I'm retired, it seems that simple days are uncommon.
For the past two weeks, I've had one, two, and sometimes three events a day.
Interspersed in the busyness, I find simple joy while walking my dog, drinking coffee with my husband on the deck, joining my friends for line dancing exercise class, spending time with my kids and grandkids, or walking out into the yard to photograph the sunset at the end of the day.
Recently, I've found new joyful moments by playing my ukulele with our family band at nursing homes.
Our practice sessions are flashbacks of the simple days, often humorous, relaxing, and most of all precious time together.
When my mom sings now, she's hearing her kids, daughter-in-law, and niece instead of her brothers.
It isn't always easy to discover simple joys in our complicated world.
My hope is that if I fill my time with enough simple joys, they will become simple days.
Copyright (c) July 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 9, 2018>
I've always been fascinated with the universe.
When I look at the moon and stars at night, it makes me realize what a small speck I am on the landscape of this world.
Throughout my life, I've heard different people proclaim that our world was coming to an end.
The most recent deadline was April 2018.
Well, unless something happened that I wasn't aware of, we are still here.
When I was a kid, sometimes I attended a church that believed the end was imminent.
The preacher would actually pray for the world to be destroyed and for the rapture to begin.
I could not throw myself into that prayer wholeheartedly, and I was always happy to walk outside and see that nothing drastic had happened.
But there is one end that I could support unequivocally--the end of Alzheimer's.
Exciting news from the world of research indicates that scientists have finally made an important breakthrough.
Biogen and Eisai announced that the drug BAN2401 just finished phase 2 and that the drug demonstrated slowing the progression of Alzheimer's.
The positive results were after an 18- month period.
This is another drug that targets amyloid beta proteins.
Some researchers had begun to question the amyloid beta approach because of the massive failures.
In fact, Biogen was disappointed in the 12-month data and considered abandoning the research.
Now, they are looking at a phase 3 study.
The predictions are 50% that BAN2401 will be approved.
This is extremely good news following Pfizer's announcement that they would abandon development of an Alzheimer's drug.
Research costs are astronomical and failure is the norm Thus far, the quest for an effective drug for Alzheimer's has resulted in a 99.6% failure rate.
The FDA has not approved an Alzheimer's drug in over a decade.
The Alzheimer's drugs on the market today treat the symptoms of Alzheimer's and can improve quality of life for some people with dementia.
What they don't do is slow the progression of the disease.
A treatment that slowed the progression or delayed the onset of the disease would result in big savings for families and the government.
According to the Alzheimer's Association, if a treatment is found by 2025 that would delay the onset of Alzheimer's by five years, it would save $220 billion in the first five years.
By 2050, families would save $87 billion and America $367 billion.
By changing the trajectory of Alzheimer's disease, we would save lives and dollars.
The question remains--is the end near?
Will BAN2401 be the success story we've been waiting for?
Only time will tell.
In the meantime, we can all pray fervently that the end of Alzheimer's is near.
Copyright (c) July 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, June 28, 2018>
Missouri weather is well known for its extremes.
Our dog likes to hang out on the deck while we go to town, but sometimes, like today with a 100+ index, it just isn't a good idea.
Recently, Harold built a "room" for her in the basement where she can stay while we make short trips to town.
We furnished it with a chair, a dog bed, and toys.
This morning, I took the dog outside.
She immediately trotted toward the garage, went down the steps to the basement, and stopped in front of the basement door.
I was surprised that she had noticed we were getting ready to go somewhere and led the way to her room.
Although we'd only used the room a few times, she already knew the routine.
Routines can become boring and sometimes we feel compelled to shake things up a bit to keep life interesting.
But there's something to be said for the stability and comfort of knowing our day is going to click along as expected.
Daily routines keep our lives running smoothly, especially if we have a loved one with dementia.
Having set times for meals, bathing, dressing, activities, and bedtime helps both the caregiver and their loved one with dementia make it through the day.
Keeping a routine is helpful for a person who becomes confused.
With subtle help and reminders, your loved one can maintain independence for as long as possible.
It is important to be flexible enough to deal with the unexpected.
We all fall into patterns of routine.
For me, it's to put on a pot of coffee first thing in the morning.
I don't feel quite human until after my first cup of coffee.
A few days ago, I squeezed out the last few grounds of coffee from the canister and knew I had to refill it.
While we were in the middle of fixing biscuits and sausage gravy, I decided it would be better to get that chore out of the way after I'd already downed a cup of coffee.
I brought in a new can of coffee and grabbed the tab on the foil seal.
Coffee shot out of that can with all the force of a bottle rocket.
Coffee grounds pummeled my apron, my chest, down my blouse, all over the counter, and of course, all over the floor I'd mopped the evening before.
Talk about a mess!
Talk about ruining my sleepy-eyed early morning routine.
After that, Murphy's Law kicked in.
While Harold was stirring gravy, I placed the biscuit baking sheet on the unused burners.
"It's hot," I said.
He accidently touched his arm to the sheet, jerked his hand, and gravy went flying.
Awe, how much better it would have been if our routine had not been thrown out of kilter.
Routine and flexibility are two sides of the same coin.
For those of us who prefer calm to drama, routine is our friend and flexibility keeps us from freaking out when things go wrong.
Sometimes we just have to clean up the coffee grounds, change our clothes, and jump in the shower.
Before you know it, you are back on track to have a normal day.
Copyright (c) June 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 16, 2018>
I sat in the Kansas City airport contemplating the 2018 Alzheimer's forum, and couldn't help but think about birthday wishes.
For the first time ever, I'll be visiting with my legislators on my birthday.
I can remember when I was a child, I thought about my birthday wish ahead of time.
I don't recall any earth shattering wishes.
I remember homemade birthday cakes with candy pieces spelling out "Happy Birthday" and candleholders made out of the same sugary confection.
With eight kids, birthdays weren't unusual or cause for a huge celebration.
I've had a few memorable ones over the years of my life.
I think the one that stands out in my mind the most was a camping trip gone haywire.
A huge group of the Fisher family was camping at Rhody Lake in Oregon.
To make a long story shorter, I slept in the tent with a bunch of kids and one of them peed on me.
The next day, my birthday, was miserable.
My kids were misbehaving, and I was cranky and out of sorts.
No one, not even Jim, acknowledged it was my birthday and, oh, yes, I was feeling sorry for myself and too stubborn to bring it up.
Well, later in the afternoon, as everyone was relaxing around the campfire, suddenly here came my sister-in-law carrying a birthday cake.
Everyone started singing, and I started crying when I realized no one had forgotten.
They just wanted to surprise me.
Years later, right after we moved into our house, the family decided to have a surprise birthday party for me.
Jim clued me in, and I met everyone at the door welcoming them to my "surprise" party.
So, whatever my birthday wishes were in the past, I know for sure what they will be this year.
First, and foremost, I wish for a cure for Alzheimer's.
In the meantime, I wish that our legislative asks are met with favor.
We have three federal priorities: An increase in Alzheimer's research funding, the BOLD Act, and PCHETA.
Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease in America.
One in every five Medicare dollars is spent on caring for a person with dementia.
The disease is expensive both for the family and the government.
The average monthly cost for a person with dementia at the end of life is $4,866.
Palliative care reduces that cost to $1,534.
The only solution to negate the expense is to find a cure or effective treatment.
This can't be accomplished without research.
We are asking for an increase of $425 million for Alzheimer's research.
The stakes are high in terms of human life and economic savings for families and our country.
A treatment that would delay the onset of Alzheimer's by five years would save $220 billion during that period of time.
The Building Our Largest Dementia Infrastructure for Alzheimer's Act (BOLD) will create a road map to treating Alzheimer's like the public health threat that it is.
This act creates a public health infrastructure countrywide.
Increasing data collection, analysis, and timely reporting will save billions through early diagnosis.
Centers of excellence will improve diagnostic procedures and quality of life for our loved ones.
One of the best decisions our family made was to use hospice care for Jim, and my only regret is that we did not use hospice sooner.
Hospice provided comfort for Jim and for us as we faced the final days of his life.
The Palliative Care and Hospice Education and Training Act (PCHETA) will ensure that end of life care is provided by well-trained workforce.
Nearly half of all people with Alzheimer's depend on hospice care during their final days.
After a few days seeing the sites and catching up with my friends and fellow advocates, we will be ready to roll up our sleeves and get to work.
On Tuesday when we go to Capitol Hill, we will be armed with facts and figures, but more importantly we bring our personal experiences and passion to find a cure.
Our hearts, wishes, and mission will be for a world without Alzheimer's, and we are willing to ask, ask, and ask again until there is no longer a need to ask.
That is my birthday wish!
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher June 2018
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, June 7, 2018>
One of the line dances we do in our line dancing exercise class is called "As Country as Can Be." I think that would be a fitting description for me.
I was raised in the Ozarks, miles from the nearest town, down a dirt road full of potholes.
The first time Jim drove to my house, he declared, "This is so far back in the sticks, I bet you have to pipe in sunshine." It's also well known that you can take the girl out of the country, but you'll never take the country out of the girl.
I've lived in four different towns in three different states, and the shortfall all of them had was--they were not in the country.
I was much happier in the most modest home in the country than I was when we lived in a condo in town.
Still, as a barefoot country kid, I never dreamt that I would come as far as I have in my life or live in the kind of home I have now.
I realize this is backwards for kids today who often take a big step down when they go out on their own.
When I walk the dog, I enjoy the quiet, starlit nights and lazy country mornings.
This morning during our walk, I saw a squirrel clinging to a dead branch, swinging back and forth.
It reminded me of our entertainment when we were kids: swinging on grapevines, sliding on mossy rocks in the creek, swimming in the lake, or walking in the woods.
Our home had no phone or air conditioning.
I can remember settling down in a cool spot in front of the fan to read library books.
One of the benefits of coming from poverty is that you are grateful for what circumstances and hard work have brought your way.
I remember that during the recession, some people were terrified of losing their wealth and being (gasp!)
poor.
The way I looked at it, I had already been there and it didn't scare me.
Some people think that poor people are miserable.
It couldn't be further from the truth.
Other people think money equates happiness, and that isn't true either.
If I've learned one lesson in life, it is that money makes life's journey smoother, if you don't allow money to be in the driver's seat.
Working on Indelible, brings back memories of the financially stressed years that Jim and I had.
We always managed to pay our bills, feed our kids, and have a roof over our heads.
Jim was able to keep any old $200 car running, so we had transportation.
So what if my clothes came from garage sales?
We made it through the hard times on our own.
The hard financial times were a veritable walk in the park compared to the years of dementia.
Those times were trying, but I was glad that we lived in the country.
When Jim wandered off, he was in familiar territory and wasn't in danger of walking into traffic.
My life has spanned over six decades.
I still enjoy starry nights as much now as I did when I was a kid lying on a quilt in my Grandma's front yard.
I still look upon the heavens with wonder and awe.
No matter where the remainder of my life might take me, or where I may live, nothing will ever take the country out of me.
I will always be as country as can be.
Copyright (c) June 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 28, 2018>
I love biscuits and gravy.
As far as I'm concerned, it is the best breakfast ever.
A few weeks ago, I pulled down the canister of Bisquick and made biscuits that didn't raise.
"The Bisquick is too old," I told my husband.
Nevertheless, we poured sausage gravy on top and ate them anyway.
After I bought a new box of Bisquick, I made a batch of tasty biscuits that didn't require gravy to make them edible.
Strangely, the next batch was hard and heavy.
I grumbled and threatened to buy canned biscuits.
Just as we finished eating, Harold said, "You have that new box of Bisquick," and he pointed at the small box nestled between the cereal canisters.
"No wonder they were a flop!
I didn't use the right stuff." I had forgotten that I hadn't put the new Bisquick in the canister.
No matter what we do, if we don't use the right stuff, we don't get optimal results.
I made good biscuits again Monday.
Normally, on Memorial Day, I'd be rushing to make it to the ceremony at the Veterans Cemetery in Higginsville, but between the oppressive heat and road construction, my sister-in-law Ginger and I went Sunday to place flowers in front of Jim's resting place.
An unexpected advantage of being at home was that my son dropped by for a visit and joined us for biscuits and gravy.
I was glad I'd used the right stuff!
When Jim joined the U.S. Army, he showed that he had the right stuff.
He fulfilled his obligation as a citizen by serving a tour of duty in Vietnam.
Although he didn't agree with the war, he loved his country.
The war changed his life.
Between PTSD, a neck injury, and exposure to Agent Orange, he lived with chronic physical and mental pain until his death from dementia.
On Memorial Day, we think of the people who sacrificed for our freedom.
We think about the soldiers who died and those who died inside.
We honor those who had the right stuff to risk life and life altering injury to fight for the United States of America.
We place our hands on our hearts and pledge allegiance to the flag.
The original pledge of 1892 was recited as "I pledge allegiance to my Flag and to the Republic for which it stands: One Nation indivisible with Liberty and Justice for all." With these twenty-three words, Americans pledged that we would not be divided and that we wanted liberty and justice for everyone.
Later, of course, "my flag" was changed to "the flag of the United States of America." The U.S. was a land of immigrants, and this change was to clarify the pledge was to the U.S. flag.
The last change in 1954 was to add "under God." A lot has been said lately about respecting the flag, but we disrespect it in many ways without a second thought, or being aware that we've done so.
The flag is not to be used for advertising, printed or otherwise impressed on paper napkins or boxes that are for temporary use and discarded.
No part of the flag is to be used in a costume or athletic uniform.
It is important to think about the right stuff that goes into being an American.
The right stuff begins on the inside and manifests itself in how we treat others.
Anything less and we disrespect the flag and those who risked everything to protect our freedoms.
On Memorial Day, we think about the sacrifices that make this the country it is, but it's our everyday behavior that makes that sacrifice worthwhile.
Copyright (c) May 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 19, 2018>
I stopped by Arby's one night last week and ordered the usual: regular roast beef, turkey ranch & bacon sandwich, and curly fries.
"One Arby's sauce.
That's it," I said to indicate I didn't want any drinks.
He read the order back to me and at the end he said, "a root beer." I wasn't sure what I'd said that he interpreted as "root beer" but I had to laugh.
It just struck me as funny that he heard something that I hadn't said at all.
After I got home, I saw a graphic on Facebook that said, "Yanny or Laurel" which do you hear?
Well, I gave it a listen and didn't hear either word.
I heard "Yammy." Later, I saw two other people who heard "Yammy." "I guess we march to the sound of a different drum," I wrote beneath the original post.
Later, I read an explanation--it depends on which tones an individual hears best, the speakers on your electronic devise, and the acoustics of the room.
As an experiment, I had my husband listen to the special word.
Both of us were listening at the same time.
He heard "laurel." I heard "Yammy." To me this experiment explains a lot.
Is this the reason that people hear completely different things?
For example, you listen to a speech.
One person thinks it's great and another person hears the flaws.
One person hears a profound statement, and another hears nonsense.
Okay, so this may not have to do with one person hearing "yanny" and another hearing "laurel," but in another way it is similar.
How we perceive speech is as individual as each person who is listening.
This one word may provide some insight into how a person with dementia might hear something totally different from the words we say to them.
Think about it.
If two people can listen to the same sound, but hear different words, how much more confusing would the sound of words be to a person with a disease that affects his brain?
Communicating with a loved one who has Alzheimer's is challenging.
Because words may become difficult, tone of voice and body language are vital to good communication with a loved one.
Although disputed by some, Albert Mehrabian's study of communication is sometimes called the "rule of seven." His study indicated that only seven percent of communication is verbal, while fifty-five percent is body language, and thirty-eight percent is tone of voice.
Regardless of whether you really believe the rule of seven in normal communications, I would agree that it certainly applies to a person with dementia.
When words begin to fail, other forms of communication are essential so that the person understands you.
Tone of voice and facial expressions convey your thoughts and emotions more effectively than words alone.
Hearing a mechanical voice say this special word could be a breakthrough in the art of communication if we allow it to be.
Some people say the argument is "silly," and I'll have to agree to get in a heated argument over how the word sounds to you is silly.
It can be a valuable reminder that people don't always hear exactly what we say even accounting for those who are hard of hearing, or have selective hearing.
Even at seven percent, verbal communication is overrated if your loved one has dementia.
Copyright (c) May 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 15, 2018>
I began an organized effort to clear my calendar several months ago, but I'm yet to reap the benefits of any hours gained.
I had plans to spend some of that extra time working on Jim's memoir and, of course, the Walk to End Alzheimer's will be here before we know it!
I've been busy lately with updating a website for the change of officers in Sedalia Business Women.
I also took photos at the installation and completed a photo book for the outgoing president.
It seems I've barely had time to breathe for trying to get everything finished.
Our incoming president, Donna, was president year before last, but her husband became ill and passed away while she was serving her term.
She missed a lot of meetings and felt like she had not had time to enjoy her time as president.
Usually, installation is pretty straight forward, but somehow the menu was mixed up.
Instead of the chicken and veggies we were expecting, we had a buffet of hamburgers, potato salad, and basically, a picnic setup.
After a talk with the chef, wait staff rushed around and added grilled chicken and vegetables.
It was unexpected, but tasty just the same.
Other meetings were going on and the wait staff rushed past us with platters of great smelling food on their way to other rooms.
We stepped out of their way and finally, the traffic slowed down.
After our meal, installation of officers began with a candlelight ceremony.
As the officers stood there holding their candles, I stepped close to the buffet table to snap a few photos.
Out of the corner of my eye, I saw a man standing beside me.
I figured he was waiting patiently for me to take my photo, so I snapped a few shots and lowered my camera.
I turned to give him the go-ahead, but to my surprise no one was there.
So to the unexpected, we add the unexplained.
I found out many years ago, that not everything that happens in life can be explained, and that sometimes things happen that are downright creepy.
My grandkids used to want me to tell them some of the stories of my experiences with the unexplained at bedtime, until my granddaughter would say, "Grandma Linda, you are creeping me out!" Some of the unexplained isn't creepy at all.
Sometimes, it can be comforting, or a message.
I've noticed these experiences happen during times of change.
Shortly after Jim and I moved into our mobile home, Jim was working in the garden and I was planting flowers.
While my back was turned, Jim saw his uncle that had passed away years before.
Jim said it wasn't a ghost--it was his uncle standing there beside him.
His uncle said, "Jim, you need to sharpen your hoe." Now, wouldn't you think any message from the beyond would be profound?
From the shocked look on Jim's face, I knew he told the truth.
When they worked in the fields together, Jim said his uncle often told him to sharpen his hoe.
Some people believe they have a guardian angel to protect, guide, and comfort them in times of trouble, or in times of change.
Whether we believe in angels watching over us, or just leave the unexplained, unexplained is an individual choice.
After the candlelight ceremony, Donna gave her acceptance speech and announced her theme, "Guardians of the Future." She broke down when she talked about her husband and how everyone had rallied to keep the club going so that she could be with him.
As far as the man I saw at installation, I have an idea who he might have been and why he was there.
I don't think he was there for me, or for me to see.
I don't think he even intended to be seen; he was merely offering a comforting presence during a time of change.
Copyright (c) May 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 1, 2018>
When I looked at this week on my calendar, it seemed like it had been attacked by a magic marker.
Some days had as many as three events with only Wednesday sitting in the middle of the week without a single notation.
Monday was a red-letter day on my calendar because that was the day we local Alzheimer's advocates were meeting with Congresswoman Hartzler.
Our meeting was scheduled for 10:30 at the Sedalia Fire Station.
Jamie, a firefighter and a Walk committee member, and I decided to rearrange the room so that it was more conducive to conversation.
We called it a square, round table setting.
The Congresswoman arrived on schedule, and after introductions, we sat down to talk about research funding and the BOLD Infrastructure for  Alzheimer's Act.
As Congresswoman Hartzler's ambassador, I thanked her for her support of Alzheimer's research.
In the years I've traveled to D.C., I've seen funding increase from $400 million to more than $1 billion.
The professional budget calls for $2 billion to reach our goal of a cure or effective treatment by 2025.
We are asking for an increase of $425 million for fiscal year 2019.
We talked about how Alzheimer's is a public health threat because the burden is large--five million Americans have Alzheimer's disease.
Because Alzheimer's is a public health issue, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) would collect data on cognitive decline and lead the nations efforts to improve quality of life for those with the disease and reduce the costs associated with it.
Alzheimer's affects not only the person with the disease, but also affects the caregiver.
Several caregivers shared their stories.
My mom said, "I saw how stressed Linda was...every day.
She was working and taking care of Jim.
She couldn't sleep because Jim would wander off in the night." Another advocate shared how her grandfather's personality changed and how things he said to her grandmother stayed with her even after he passed away.
Other caregivers told of instances where the person with the disease outlived the caregiver.
We need to use a BOLD approach to end Alzheimer's!
The BOLD Act establishes Alzheimer's Centers of Excellence; provides funding to state, local, and tribal public health departments to promote early diagnosis; and increases collection and reporting of data on cognitive decline.
As our time drew to a close, I made the "ask." Congresswoman Hartzler said she would study BOLD (HR 4256) and give consideration to lending her support.
She praised our handouts and thanked us for keeping her informed about our legislation.
We had forty-five minutes with the Congresswoman.
As she was leaving, she hugged my ninety-one-year-old mother and said, "When I grow up, I want to be you." Copyright (c) May 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 25, 2018>
I spent the weekend in Independence with my Business Women of Missouri sisters.
This year, I had the pleasure of taking the "official" photos for the group.
I've taken the "unofficial" photos for several years.
As usual, I got a little carried away and took more than five hundred photos.
Well, now, that makes the selection process a little bit harder.
The most fun was taking group photos in front of the fireplace.
My goal was to get the best and most flattering photos possible, so I borrowed a stepladder from the hotel.
It was a little wobbly, but in true sisterly fashion, my friend Ann offered to steady the ladder.
I knew the photo shoot was successful when one woman commented that I made the photo shoot "fun." I enjoyed taking the photos and didn't want to stress out this time because they were counting on me.
I've always enjoyed taking photos even when I had to send the film off to have it developed.
I can remember how looking at the photos made me feel.
Sometimes I was disappointed that the photo fell short of my expectations, and other times I took a little too much pride in how well I'd captured a moment.
My professional photographer friend Randy says good photography is about having an eye for the best shot, but mostly it's about timing.
Since the majority of my photos are sunsets, I've learned that timing is crucial.
A little too soon and the sky isn't colorful.
A little too late and the sky turns to a shade of drab grey.
Yes, it is possible to take a beautiful photo of some not so beautiful moments, or maybe blurry photos of a peaceful, happy moment.
Photos capture the stillness of a moment and can bring back the emotions we felt inside at that exact time.
Smiles may hide a troubled heart, and others might look at the same photo and misunderstand the image.
Our memories are much like photos or short movie clips.
From a distance, the past may be out of focus, and open to interpretation.
How many times have you done something that mortified you, but years later that became one of the funny stories you tell?
Yeah, me too!
On the flipside, we mull the could have, should haves.
That would be those times we wronged another or made a mistake that had horrible consequences.
To sin means to fall short of the mark, and we've all sinned.
Even when others forgive us, we may never forgive ourselves.
The hardest thing I ever did in my life was to be a caregiver.
I'd like to say that I was perfect in my role, but I wasn't.
In the still of the night, I try to convince myself that I did more things right than I did wrong, but why do the wrongs weigh so much heavier on my heart?
It is easier for me to tell another caregiver to be forgiving of his or her mistakes than to heed my own advice.
We are only human.
As much as we might admire the abilities of a superhero, they are fictional characters and we are not.
We are the stars of our own reality show--and our own worst critic.
Nobody's life is picture perfect, although we may look that way in photos.
We each have faults, regrets, and imperfections too numerous to mention.
Living doesn't have the flat smooth surface of a photo.
Living has depth, rough patches, pitfalls, and chasms.
Life is messy, but it does have warmth, love, and a human touch that cannot be found in the most perfect photo.
Copyright (c) April 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 7, 2018>
This morning I was getting ready to take the dog out and pondered what to wear during this cold snap.
My eyes lit on an old flannel shirt.
Yes, this was a flannel shirt kind of day.
As I pulled on the shirt, I thought about the history of this shirt.
The frayed collar and the ripped shirttail were indications of a well-worn shirt.
That's not too odd considering the shirt had aged a quarter of a century, or more.
Jim and I both wore his flannel shirts on cool spring days when we were building our house.
In fact, I believe the tear in this shirt came from catching the shirttail on a nail.
On a day like today, Jim might have put on a flannel shirt, grabbed up his fishing pole, and headed to the lake.
The fish always tasted better when the water was cold.
Fishing brought Jim a lot of enjoyment.
I remember one time after he first started showing signs of dementia, he decided to go to Truman to fish.
I went off to work, happy that he was going to enjoy the day.
I wrote about that day in my journal, and here is an excerpt from Indelible: My co-worker Tammy thought I was out of the office, but when she called my cell phone, Jim answered.
She came into my office.
"I think there's something wrong with him," she said.
"He just didn't sound right." Jim's plans for the day had been a trip to Truman Dam to fish.
I called his cell phone.
"Where are you," I asked him.
"Right here," he said.
"Can you tell me where you are?
What highway are you on?"                 "I'm on I-70," he said, "and I have a friend with me." I-70 was the opposite direction from Truman.
"What are you doing on I-70?" I asked.
"I'm taking my friend to Higginsville," he said.
"Who is your friend?" "I don't know his name.
He needed a ride home."            Jim was easily distracted and I was afraid to keep him talking while he was driving on the Interstate.
I told him to call me as soon as he got home.
Jim's assurance that he knew this guy didn't mean anything.
If someone started a conversation with him, Jim thought that meant he knew the person.
Why I kept this flannel shirt out of all Jim's shirts is a mystery.
Apparently, when I sorted through his clothing to donate to Open Door, I didn't consider this shirt worthy of charity.
I hadn't worn the shirt in a long time and my dog was curious.
She sniffed the sleeves as I fastened her leash to the harness.
I thought maybe the shirt smelled funny from being in a drawer, but it smelled fine to me.
It smelled of memories and younger days.
If I used my imagination, it might have smelled of campfires and Colorado mornings.
So today, I am wrapped up in memories of flannel shirt days, wearing a shirt that should have been tossed in the ragbag twenty years ago.
Minimalists warn us about this kind of hoarding.
I have a new ladies' flannel shirt that isn't threadbare or torn.
So wouldn't the logical thing be to toss this shirt?
When I take it off tonight, it will be decision time.
Do I throw it away or put it in the laundry?
Trash or treasure?
My mind says trash, but my heart says treasure.
When in doubt, I follow my heart.
Copyright (c) April 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 2, 2018>
Well, Mother Nature pulled quite an April Fools' joke on us.
Here we were all celebrating spring when the weather did a complete about face.
I wanted to wear a dress to Easter services and even tried to psych myself up for a pedicure in case I decided to wear my sandals.
Instead, I wore my boots and my winter coat.
Sunday dawned with below freezing temperatures with wind chills thrown in for good measure.
That's what happens when Easter Sunday falls on April Fools Day.
Ma Nature thinks she's a jokester.
Just to make a point, we had that good old thunder snow, wintery mixture falling all over the place during the afternoon.
For some reason, Sunday seemed so long that I kind of thought we'd moved right into Tuesday.
As I pulled myself out of a sound sleep Monday morning, I couldn't seem to lift my body out of bed.
I propped myself up on pillows, glanced at my cell phone, and then  pulled the blanket up over me and thought about the month ahead.
April has always been the month of taxes, conferences, and enjoying the signs of nature's rejuvenation.
It is also a month that catches me off guard at one time or another.
Today was that day.
I lay in bed thinking about the memories I can't let go.
April 5, 1970, was the day Jim came home from Vietnam.
We celebrated his "homecoming" by making it a special day for him.
I know one year we forgot our wedding anniversary, but we never forgot his homecoming.
It was a happy day when he came back to the "world." Happy days make sad memories.
Homecoming day never passes that I don't think of him.
April 18, 2005, he left the world for a better place.
That didn't make it any easier for the people who loved him.
Just thinking about that day, makes my heart hurt.
If I'm going to make it through April without letting it get me down, I'm going to have to accentuate the positive.
I know sunshine will eventually chase away the gloomy skies and cold weather.
Mother Nature will get back on her meds and show us some sunshine, blue skies, and cotton-candy clouds.
Of course, we might have a few random thunderstorms and tornadoes thrown in the mix for excitement.
It is springtime--time for daffodils, tulips, irises, and lilacs to bloom.
The birds will be tweet-tweedle-tweeting every morning.
In the meantime, I'd really like to take the dog out without bundling up like it's a cold January day.
Hey, Mother Nature, I'm calling you out.
This is April 2 and the weather is still miserable.
I remember a rhyme from school when someone played a joke a day late.
"April Fools is already past, and you're the biggest fool at last!"  It's not nice when Mother Nature acts like a fool.
Copyright (c) April 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 31, 2018>
A few days ago, I was chopping an onion.
While working on the mundane task, I began to ponder various subjects.
During times of contemplation, I tend to be a deep thinker and it takes me to a different place.
The first thing I thought about was how careless we can be in our conversations with our loved ones.
I saw two family feuds play out online for everyone to see.
Hurtful words, accusations, misunderstandings, and throwing zingers out there for everyone to see.
Why would someone do that?
The onions made my eyes sting as I thought about how sad it was that words could cause such a rift.
Knowing there was nothing I could do about that, I turned a mental page and opened a new chapter of thought.
I thought about death and illness.
Why did dementia find Jim?
Try as I might during my rumination, I found no answers.
It's not as if there was something off with his thinking.
Jim was a logical, deep thinker and talented in so many ways.
Without answers, I continued to chop the onion into bits and traveled to a different time and place.
My hate-affair with illness goes back to childhood.
I never could understand why people had to be sick or feel pain.
It was a puzzle with too many pieces for a child to put together.
Even now as an adult, I still don't comprehend why a human body can have so much go wrong with it.
On the other hand, when you think about the complexity of human anatomy, how can so many body parts work in harmony?
Every individual is different.
Some are happy and healthy, while others are plagued with misfortune.
My memories from a half-century ago were as choppy and incomplete as the pieces of onion on the cutting board in front of me.
When I looked at old photos of myself, I felt like it was a different life.
I've changed and my whole way of life has changed.
Now, we take photos of everything, but when I was a kid, photos were rare.
My favorite two photos were taken when I was about five years old.
I wore a cute dress and posed on the hood of our car.
Somehow, those pictures wound up in Jim's billfold, and he carried them around from the time we were dating until a few years after his memory problems began.
For some reason, those photos disappeared from his wallet, and I have no idea what happened to them.
I imagine they will turn up some day, but for now, it's just another mystery to think about when I chop onions.
The way people weave in and out of our lives is another mystery to contemplate.
It seems that people who are so important at one stage of our lives vanish into the mist of time.
Some leave, others appear.
No one ever replaces the loved ones who left us behind when they moved on, or passed away.
Yet, at the same time, new friendships are formed and births allow our hearts to love again.
I chopped the onion into tiny little pieces and thought about how it would never be a whole onion again.
It would be silly to think that it could be.
The onion was forever changed, but it was still an onion.
Chopping an onion gave me time to ruminate about the mysteries that have perplexed me throughout my lifetime.
As I finished my task, I wiped away the tears the onion brought to my eyes, pushed away the troubling thoughts, and snapped back into the present.
Copyright (c) March 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 18, 2018>
I don't even like to talk before I have my first cup of coffee in the mornings.
I like it hot with creamer in it and usually drink a half cup at a time.
My husband, on the other hand, only drinks black coffee from his 16-ounce Mr. Coffee mug.
A few days ago, we started breakfast before I'd had time to finish my first cup of coffee, so I wasn't functioning at my best.
I had to be in town, and figured with luck, I could squeeze in time to eat.
We routinely divvy up the job of preparing breakfast, and my part is to pour the juice, milk, and coffee.
I was pouring juice when Harold said, "My cup doesn't have much coffee in it." He handed it to me, and I grabbed the pot and poured it full.
As I headed back with the mug, it slipped out of my hand crashing to the floor.
Coffee splattered onto the refrigerator, my shirt, and puddled all over the kitchen linoleum.
Sixteen ounces of black coffee turned into a river snaking in all directions.
Instead of crying over the spilt coffee, I said a few choice words, wiped off the refrigerator, grabbed a mop, and went to work cleaning up the mess.
This wasn't my first time to clean up spilt coffee.
Jim usually made the morning coffee, even after dementia made every small task harder.
One morning several years ago, I walked into the kitchen to pour my first cup.
A full pot of coffee was all over the counter and had spilled onto the kitchen carpet.
Jim had forgotten the step of setting the carafe on the warmer to catch the brewed coffee.
I don't think I cried that time, but I probably felt like it.
It was unbearably sad that Jim, the person who always made the perfect pot of coffee, forgot how to do something he had done his entire adult life.
Jim's morning routine was to drink coffee, smoke cigarettes, and play his guitar.
He quit smoking a few months before I noticed he was having memory problems.
That was certainly a blessing, not just that he'd finally quit smoking, but that we didn't have to deal with the danger of him lighting a cigarette and forgetting to use the ashtray.
Jim struggled to play the guitar as his dementia progressed.
After he went in the nursing home, it wasn't long before he quit drinking coffee.
It is only human to cry over our circumstances when we know we can't change them.
Standing there mourning over the past isn't going to help or change anything.
We have to grab our mops and do what we can to put things right and move on.
I do not condone or even understand people who deliberately hurt others.
Certain people demean others to give themselves the appearance of superiority.
They may give more credence to our mistakes than they deserve thinking it diminishes theirs.
Avoid these people when possible; otherwise, don't let them disparage your self-esteem.
Dwelling on the wrongs we've done won't improve our situation.
No one expects perfection.
We err.
We make stupid mistakes.
We drop the metaphorical mug and make a mess.
If we learn from our mistakes and make atonement, we can walk in the sunshine and avoid the shadows.
Copyright (c) March 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 15, 2018>
Last week advocates from across the state of Missouri visited the state capitol.
Jessica and I traveled from Sedalia to meet with Senator Sandy Crawford, Representatives Dean Dohrman, and Nathan Beard.
We would also lend support as needed with our fellow advocates.
It was a brisk day and the security line was long.
We worked our way through the line in time to be recognized on the House of Representatives floor.
Our first appointment was with our senator, Sandy Crawford.
We waited in the hallway for our fellow advocates, Crista, Jennifer, and Mindy to join us.
After the introductions, Jessica explained the importance of the Alzheimer's grants for respite.
She explained that 110,000 Missourians have Alzheimer's and that their 314,000 unpaid caregivers need an occasional break from the daunting task of taking care of a loved one at home.
The $450,000 grant is in the budget for the Department of Health and Senior Services.
A survey of caregivers show that 99% state that respite helped them to care for their loved one at home longer.
Sixty percent of nursing home residents in Missouri is paid for by Medicaid.
Respite helps 500 families, and if those families could keep their loved ones home two months longer, it could save the state of Missouri $2 million in Medicaid nursing home payments.
Two months is a conservative estimate.
I know that having home health care for Jim made it possible to keep him at home about six months longer.
I received a small reimbursement through respite funds that helped me pay for his care.
This was the only financial help we received, because Jim was too young for the programs in place to help seniors.
I explained the Structured Family Caregiver Act.
This Act is designed to provide a new level of support for Medicaid qualified care recipients.
The caregiver must provide the personal care needs and live full-time with the person who needs the services.
An in-home agency administers the program.
They provide professional support with care planning, training, monthly visits, and remote consultations.
This pilot program will be limited to 300 care recipients.
It would provide a cost effective alternative to nursing home care.
How exciting this will be if it passes!
Family caregivers often have no experience providing twenty-four/seven care for another person.
They often don't know what to expect or how to handle difficult behavior.
The Structured Family Caregiver Act needs support!
We opened the door and now we want our fellow Missourians to keep it from slamming shut.
The bill sponsor, Kurt Bahr, is about to term limit out.
If this bill doesn't pass this session, it may never be proposed again.
If this pilot program proves successful, it could well be a new model for keeping loved ones at home much longer.
I had a lot of family support with Jim, and I was much younger than many family caregivers.
I often wondered how older caregivers could manage, especially without family support.
Caregiving is hard and often life threatening.
The stress of being solely responsible for a person with dementia leads to health problems for the caregiver.
If you live in Missouri, please write, email, or call your state representative and senator today.
It just takes a few moments.
Ask them to fund the Alzheimer's grants for respite and to move forward with the Structured Family Caregiver Act and then vote to pass it.
If you live in another state check with your Alzheimer's Association public policy staff to see how you can become an advocate.
Alzheimer's is an equal opportunity disease.
It affects Republicans and Democrats.
Alzheimer's knows no racial or economic limits.
Anyone can get Alzheimer's and people like you and me wind up being caregivers or being cared for by our spouses, daughters, sons, or even grandchildren.
Until we find a cure, we must provide extraordinary support for family caregivers and quality of life care for those who have Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) March 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ Don't know how to contact your elected official?
Go to http://www.senate.mo.gov/ and https://www.house.mo.gov/
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 8, 2018>
Lately, I've been having issues with autocorrect, especially on my phone.
The first problem with the phone is the small keyboard makes it easy to type a word incorrectly, and when autocorrect fixes that, I'm happy.
But too often autocorrect will take a word that makes perfect sense and replace it with one that changes the entire meaning of what I intended to say.
Autocorrect problems aren't limited to my phone; it can create havoc on my PC.
A few days ago, I was going to a luncheon in Warsaw and I wanted to know just exactly how long it would take me to get there.
That's usually a simple task--just plug in my home address and in the destination plug in Warsaw, MO.
Except that autocorrect in its infinite wisdom kept changing it to Warszawa, Mazowieckie, Poland.
As if I could drive to Warszawa, Poland--AND get there in time for lunch!
Then, since the program was so helpful, it wanted me to install something before I could actually get those driving directions.
I wasted precious travel time trying to change the destination to Warsaw, Missouri, USA only to have it changed to Warszawa time-after-time.
After autocorrect won the battle, I kissed my husband goodbye and said, "I'm leaving right now.
I'll use OnStar to find the restaurant." "Set it before you leave," he said.
Well, I've been down that road, so to speak, many times before.
I didn't want the OnStar voice to direct me across town using weird streets, so I waited until I was on the open road.
The OnStar advisor plugged in helpful directions, and I never had to leave the state, much less the country.
It's not only electronic devices that autocorrect, my brain does it too.
Preoccupation results in senior moments where I go to one of my usual destinations rather than where I'm actually headed.
Considering how complicated our brains are, with 100 billion nerve cells connected by 100 trillion synapses, it doesn't take too much imagination to believe my brain might do its own type of autocorrect, jumping the rails, so to speak.
I shouldn't complain, though, because I believe my senior moments are simply a slight slowing down and not the catastrophic confusion of Alzheimer's.
Here's how the Alzheimer's Association explains the difference between normal aging and Alzheimer's: Poor judgment and decision making can be a sign of Alzheimer's, but occasionally making a bad decision is a sign of normal aging.
If you cannot manage a budget, it could be Alzheimer's, but missing one payment is a typical sign of aging.
Having difficulty conversing with others could be a sign of Alzheimer's, but sometimes forgetting a word is normal aging.
I believe autocorrect should be renamed "auto-incorrect" especially when it refers to my thinking.
As far as electronics, it's a battle of me against machine to see which one of us is the most stubborn.
It irritates me to have to click on a checkmark to let autocorrect know that yes, I did mean to type "address" not "espresso" as in "I need your address," not "I need your espresso." Moment of truth--sometimes I blame autocorrect when I slip a cog and actually type something I didn't intend to.
You know, like one of those Freudian slips.
Sometimes I might actually need espresso just to stay alert.
It seems to me that when I'm alert, I don't auto-incorrect nearly as often.
Copyright (c) March 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, February 22, 2018>
A request went out a few weeks ago for a video for the upcoming March 7 Memory Day.
I started out this morning to make a video for it, but ran into a snag right away.
I wanted to use photos and the music from the video I have of Jim and his brother, Bill, singing "Bridge Over Troubled Waters." Of course, I had no idea how to make a new video with the music from the other one.
Harold decided to help, but it wasn't long before we discovered my program did not have the option to separate sound from the video, but Harold's did.
Anyway, by the time we got to rolling on the project, we were working on Harold's pc and he had a limited amount of photos to use.
To make a long story shorter, the project took a new turn and instead of being a video of Memory Day, it became a memory day as we selected photos to add to the project.
We organized the photos to begin with the ones of Jim in Vietnam, followed by the one of Jim and me in Hawaii.
Of course, we had to have Jim with his guitar.
I loved that we had the photo my mom took of Jim on the beach in Oregon.
That is one of the photos on the cover of Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love.
One of the important things to me was to have the photo of Whitney when Jim began to sing about "silver girl." This photo was taken of Whitney's performance during the Miss Pettis County contest.
She said that she felt her Grandpa Jim's presence with her while she played her ukulele and sang an Elvis song.
The video ends with some photos at the Veteran's Cemetery in Higginsville.
The inscription on Jim's stone says "Rest High on That Mountain." We scattered some of Jim's ashes in a spot he designated in his beloved Rocky Mountains.
The photo we chose was one of Jim's favorite spots in Rocky Mountain National Park.
Like Whitney, sometimes I feel Jim's presence.
It makes my heart happy to watch the old videos and to hear his voice.
Jim spent a lot of time treading troubled waters during his lifetime.
Vietnam changed his life when he was young and dementia struck when he should have had many more years for his dreams to come true.
All he really dreamed of was spending time with family and traveling across country to visit the mountains and commune with nature.
He used to talk to the crows in Moraine Park, but now he flies with the eagles.
So today was an early "memory day" for me.
The video is different from what it started out to be, but it turned out exactly as it should have.
Copyright (c) February 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 13, 2018>
I saw a video that showed a young girl playing a guitar and singing "You Are My Sunshine" to her baby brother who has Down syndrome.
Through music, he now has a twelve-word vocabulary.
According to his mother, "Every word he has learned has been through music and singing." Music has always been a big part of my life.
My mom came from a musical family and Saturdays were often spent at Grandma and Grandpa's house for impromptu picking and grinning.
I guess I thought everyone was raised like that.
Then, I married Jim and it was more of the same.
He often invited all his guitar-picking, honky-tonk singing friends to our house for jam sessions.
If we weren't at our house, we were at his mom and dad's or uncles.
We seldom traveled without Jim's guitar.
His family was like my family.
None of us had much in the way of worldly possessions, but there's a richness born from hearing a heartfelt song.
Some of the best stories are told in the words of a three-chord country song.
Music can lift your spirit, give you a way to express your innermost worries or thoughts, and warm your heart.
Music is therapy.
My family--91 year old mother, brothers, sister, sister-in-law, and niece--has a band that plays at area nursing homes one week each month.
The residents really enjoy the old songs and look forward to the music fest on the appointed day.
My brother Jimmy selects the songs each month to make sure the ones they choose are the songs the residents appreciate hearing.
The songs my family sings strike a chord in the hearts and minds of their audience.
John Carpenter, founder of the Rebecca Center for Music Therapy in New York believes that live music "empowers clients to emerge from the isolation imposed by Alzheimer's disease and dementia." He believes that listening to music helps with memory recall, positive moods, helps manage pain, and helps people with dementia interact socially with others.
Jim played his guitar every day, even during the early days of dementia.
He learned to play the mandolin at an early age so he had that long-term memory to help him maintain his musical talent long after he had forgotten other skills.
The time eventually came when he played the same tune repeatedly and he forgot the words to songs he had known for years.
He still listened to music.
He had a Walkman with headphones that he carried with him everywhere.
He listened to the songs he used to play and sing.
He still tapped his foot and kept time, but he didn't sing along.
He listened in occupied silence.
Jim's mom said he cut his teeth on his dad's guitar.
He came into this world to be surrounded by music.
A big part of his life was music.
He left this world to the sounds of his favorite tunes.
Music was his therapy.
Copyright (c) February 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ  Sources: https://www.facebook.com/fox29philadelphia/videos/10155326551762061/ https://www.alz.org/cacentral/documents/Dementia_Care_9-Music_Therapy_enhancing_cognition.pdf
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 6, 2018>
"I hate ice," I told a friend this morning.
I guess that isn't exactly true...
I like ice in my tea and other cold drinks.
I like an bucket of ice when I'm staying in a hotel room.
What I should have said is, "I hate to walk or drive on ice." Over the past few days, ice on the highways led to multi-car/truck pileups, cars abandoned on roads, and slide-offs into ditches.
Short drives turned into nightmarish hours-long journeys.. Last night, ice-covered I-70 was closed down in several places due to accidents and people waited in traffic jams for hours.
In other words, it's time for retired folks like me to not take a chance on an accident.
I always say that at my age, if I break a hip, they will put me down.
Ice has never been my friend.
Several years back I fell on the ice and smacked the back of my head.
"I broke my head," I told my sister-in-law when I made it to her door.
I have never had such pain in my head before or since.
I've always been petrified to drive on ice.
Jim was always protective of me, and when bad weather struck while I was away from home, he would call to find out if I wanted him to come and get me.
When Jim was in the early stages of dementia, I trusted him to drive me to work on icy days.
After slipping and sliding my way to the car, I'd hand him the keys.
In time, the progression of the disease made Jim turn inward, and he no longer noticed bad weather or worried about how I was going to drive on ice.
This forced me to become more independent about driving during inclement weather.
I learned to navigate icy roads to go to work.
Some mornings, just as I was about to feel halfway comfortable, I'd round the corner, getting ready to head down the hill, and I'd see cars in the median, in the ditch, and flashing lights of highway patrol and tow trucks.
Now, I can just cancel most appointments and avoid the roads...and ditches.
I can spend the day being cozy and warm and not taking any chances on breaking my head.
Copyright (c) February 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 31, 2018>
This morning a special celestial event took place in the early morning hours.
The super-moon, was also a blue moon, and a total eclipse, or blood moon, added to its natural charm.
Last night, I laid out my sherpa lined sweatpants, a warm sweater, then crawled into bed wearing my thermal underwear.
I set my alarm for the unseemly hour of five a.m. Oh, yes, I used to wake up at five on every work day, but with a few years of retirement under my belt, my eyelids do not want to open at that time of day.
With such a photo op possible, I leaped out of bed and into warm outer clothing, threw on a coat, hat, scarf, and gloves.
My dog was excited that I was up so early, and she thought it was all about her.
My first trip out the door was to scope out the moon.
I took a few preliminary photos, came back inside,  put the coffee on, leashed the dog and headed back out the door.
The next time I went outside, I brought my cell phone, both cameras, a banana, and a cup of coffee.
Luckily, I had a great view of the moon from the deck.
I pulled a wicker chair up to the table and got comfortable.
As I looked at the sky, I thought about the wonders of nature and the power of God.
I thought about heaven and about the people who wait there.
A calm, peaceful feeling surrounded me as I sat alone in the still of the night, watching the moon and the clouds drifting along.
I thought about Jim and all the loved ones who no longer reside on this earth that we call home.
This morning was reminiscent of the cool mountain mornings when Jim and I camped at Moraine Park in the Rocky Mountain National Park.
Many of my most vivid memories are of our trips to Colorado.
We first went in 1983 and continued with the annual trips until they became too difficult.
In Indelible, I recall one of the trips where Jim's dementia changed what had always been a time of relaxation into a stressful situation.
Excerpt from Indelible:  In retrospect, I could measure the progression of Jim's dementia by our annual trips to Colorado.
In 1995, putting up the tent was a fiasco.
"This is the way it goes together," Jim said picking up a pole from the pile of different length rods.
We tried slipping the rods into the canvas only to find our final creation was not a tent.
"Okay, now are you ready for me to dig out the instructions?" I asked with as much patience as I could muster.
"I guess so," he said grudgingly.
Between the two of us, we managed to slide out the rods.
Even with directions, it was hard to figure out what went where.
"That's not right," Jim insisted.
"Humor me." I huffed and puffed in the thin mountain air as I struggled with the poles.
After a lot of stress, strain, and cuss words, our home away from home looked like it was supposed to.
As I wrapped myself in the warmth of my memories, a sudden cold wind roared across the deck rattling the chairs and sending a shiver through my body.
Well, that was odd, I thought.
The clouds cleared, and the moon shone through.
I snapped a few photos and set my camera on the table.
I took a sip of coffee, looked at the heavens, and thought about the people who wait for us beyond the moon.
Copyright (c) January 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 22, 2018>
The first thing I saw on my phone this morning was a video in my "memories." That simply means that I had posted the video in the past.
The video of Jim and his brother Billy singing "Bridge Over Troubled Waters" was posted in 2015.
When these memories pop up, you are given an option to share.
I hadn't even gotten out of bed this morning when I shared the video.
At night, I turn the sound off on my phone so I didn't listen to the video before I shared it.
Besides, I had to get up and around to have breakfast and go to line dancing exercise class.
After a good workout this morning at line dancing, I chatted with a few of my friends as I made my way to my car.
I took my phone out of my purse to check for text messages.
I was expecting a list of items to get at Walmart since we tend to make every trip to town count.
While I had my phone in hand, I decided to listen to the video.
Soon Jim's voice filled my heart as memories flooded back.
I thought about all the jam sessions.
I smiled at the memory of the house bursting with company and the sound of guitars and harmony.
Happy memories and sad longings flitted through my mind.
Happy won out as the video finished.
I was glad to have this reminder of our younger days, before we knew our future held the unimaginable.
I fastened my seatbelt and headed to Walmart.
I called Harold on my hands-free phone to see if we needed anything besides milk and eggs.
Somehow, I knew there had to be other items to add to the list.
After he thought for a few minutes, Harold started naming off item after item.
"I'm driving and you know how my memory is," I said.
"I'll forget half of what you told me." "Just go down every aisle and that will remind you." Thank goodness, he couldn't see me roll my eyes.
I avoid all the aisles I can.
As soon as I parked my car, I found an old sales receipt and started listing everything I could remember.
I picked up the eggs and was headed for the dairy section, when a Walmart employee paused in unpacking a box to say, "Excuse me.
May I ask you a question." "Sure," I said.
I pushed my cart out of the way of the other shoppers.
"Is your last name Fisher?" "Yes, it is." She smiled.
"I took care of your husband!" She went on to ask me what I was doing now, and I told her I was remarried and retired.
"Jim was one of the first people I took care of at the nursing home," she said.
"You know, I still remember how you were there every evening to feed him."  I told her I was working on a memoir about Jim.
"I turned on a tape recorder on my way home each night and talked about how things went." She and I said our goodbyes.
"I'm really glad you told me who you were," I said.
As I headed to the checkout, I couldn't help but smile as I thought about all the people who touched our lives.
Jim passed away more than twelve years ago, and people stop me from time to time to let me know they still remember him.
It is understandable that Jim's indelible memory will forever be in his family's minds and hearts, but amazing how many others his life touched.
In the end, instead of erasing Jim, dementia ensured he would never be forgotten.
Copyright (c) January 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 15, 2018>
  I went to sleep around midnight and woke up at 4:00 a.m.
I tossed, turned, read, tossed, turned, and read some more.
Finally more than two hours later, I went back to sleep.
The phone woke me up around 8:00.
I talked to my mom for a few minutes and went back to sleep for another hour.
From there on, my day started in a hole.
I still didn't feel rested and the snow overnight made it an easy decision to cut line-dancing class.
The bad thing is that after the holiday weight gain and total lack of exercise, I really needed it.
I have a love/hate relationship with sleep.
I usually sleep well about every other night.
Maybe "well" is an exaggeration and "better" would be more accurate.
As I lay awake, I can't help but think about all the studies connecting poor sleep to increased risk of Alzheimer's disease.
Recently, I read about an Alzheimer's sleep study that showed interrupted sleep can have immediate consequences.
Even one night of sleep disturbance can increase the levels of amyloid in the brain.
Tau levels change after several nights of disturbance.
This is bad news for my fellow insomniacs and me.
Even with these protein changes, the study does not conclude that sleeping well will decrease your chances of developing Alzheimer's, but a good night's sleep improves overall health.
Back to the early morning phone call... My mom called to tell me that my sister-in-law's father had passed away from Alzheimer's disease.
Her dad was in the same nursing home with my brother so I saw him from time-to-time before my brother passed away.
The thing I always remember about him was the big smile.
Maybe the smiles made it a little easier for the family, but it didn't eliminate the heartbreak of losing shared memories, companionship, or sharing ideas and experiences.
The disease takes a toll on an entire family.
I once started reading a best-selling Alzheimer's book by a woman who scoffed at people who were saddened or depressed when a loved one was diagnosed with Alzheimer's.
Her attitude that it wasn't a big deal set my teeth on edge.
Another super-wealthy caregiver advised not putting a loved one in a nursing home.
Keeping a loved one at home is much easier when you can hire a team to provide 24/7 care.
I could see where in-home care would be an attractive option, but not practical for most of us.
Most of us can't manage without the support of family, friends, and professionals.
Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease in America and can last for a decade or more.
When the journey ends, we can take comfort in knowing we did the best we could with the resources available to us.
I believe the most valuable gifts we have to offer are time and unconditional love.
Love doesn't end at the nursing home door or, for that matter, death's door.
Copyright (c) January 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 8, 2018>
For the past two months, my excuse for hibernating is "so busy with the holidays, you know." So what if I'm busy binge re-reading my Tony Hillerman Leaphorn and Chee books.
There isn't a better reason for sticking close to home than hearing everyone you know has the flu, or some other mysterious virus.
I've limited my social interaction to avoid giving or receiving unwanted gifts of disease.
Now, the New Year is here and the "holidays, you know" are so last year.
Last weekend was busy from start to finish.
By today, I was totally exhausted.
It didn't help that I got four hours sleep for two days in a row followed by one thirteen-hour night to make a healthy seven-hour a night average.
I blame my four-hour nights on years of caregiving.
Jim never seemed to need more than four hours of sleep, so that meant if I wanted to keep track of him, I couldn't sleep while he was up wandering around.
In the story "Gone in the Night" I re-live every caregiver's nightmare of waking up alone in bed, alone in the house, and thinking I might be alone in the world.
Excerpt from Indelible: Although I had a sense of urgency, I drove cautiously because I didn't want to hit him with the car.
I had no idea how long he'd been gone, and the farther I traveled without seeing him, the more I panicked.
I reached the crossroads and without hesitation, turned left, choosing Jim's normal route.
I pressed onward, fear and worry jockeying for position in my mind.
I rounded the next corner, headlights slicing through the darkness.
There he was!
The tension drained from my body, replaced with elation and relief.
Jim was fully dressed wearing jacket, jeans, his "Vietnam Veteran and Proud of It" cap, and his sunglasses.
He seemed to be unaware of the car and continued his measured tortoise pace, cane grasped in his left hand.
I pulled over and stopped behind him, climbed out of the car, speed walking to catch up with him.
I reached out and wrapped my fingers around his bicep, and he stopped as if he had applied his brakes.
To be honest, when Jim first went into the nursing home, I didn't think I'd be able to sleep alone in the house.
It turned out that I was so exhausted that it took me months to catch up on my rest.
Once I did, though, I was back to my four-hour sleep nights.
I still struggle to get anything like a normal night's sleep.
It concerns me because I know chronic lack of sleep is a health hazard.
I need to get back in the groove.
I took down the three Christmas trees and removed ornaments from the two trees that are lit year round.
I need to finish taking down and putting away my huge collection of nutcrackers.
For the first days of January, the twelve days of Christmas hadn't finished, but that excuse won't work now.
"Maybe I'll just leave everything up and won't have to decorate next year," I told Harold.
"You would have to dust them," he pointed out.
He knows how much I detest dusting whatnots.
"Guess I'd rather put them away than dust them," I said.
I've grown fond of putting off until tomorrow that which I do not want to do today.
Getting back into the groove isn't all that easy.
I think I'll start...tomorrow.
Copyright (c) January 2018 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 31, 2017>
As 2017 winds down, winter has barely started, and I'm ready for spring.
With the cold weather and sub-zero wind chills lately, I've had to psych myself up every time I head out the door to walk the dog.
When my husband asked, "What do you want for Christmas?" the only thing I could think of was an N-Ferno hood like he bought for himself last year.
Now, I dress as if I'm going on a polar expedition every time I walk out the door.
As with everything, it seems, there is an upside and downside to the new hood.
The cold doesn't make my face hurt anymore, but my glasses fog up and I have to remove them.
As nearsighted as I am, that means I can't see much.
Still, the hood makes me feel like a Ninja warrior battling the cold.
The best defense against the cold is layering.
I bought a pair of fleece-lined sweatpants, but they didn't stop the cold until I wore my Cuddle Duds beneath them.
This New Year's Eve, not only our bodies are layered against the cold, our souls and hearts are layered to shield us from hurt and disappointments.
In order to overcome the challenges we face on a daily basis, we have to pile on layers of accomplishment.
To defeat sadness, we need to find joy.
To defend ourselves against the darkness, we need to seek out light.
As we reflect on the dying year, we can focus on the bad or sad times, or we can laser our thoughts on the good times.
The same could be said for the past years.
A lifetime of years.
For some reason this morning, I found myself dwelling on my failures and missteps.
As I thought about the times I made stupid mistakes, I found myself sinking into a place I didn't want to be.
Then, I went on with my day--breakfast, laundry, walking the dog--those little daily obligations that are there to be done again and again.
There's nothing permanent to be gained or lost.
As I worked on Jim's memoir Indelible, I found myself laughing and crying as I relived that period of my life.
The thing is that life is cyclical.
Maybe, roller coaster might be a better description.
High highs, low lows, sudden drops, heart-stopping curves, and the moment of quiet and relief when one ride ends and before the next one begins.
Tomorrow begins a new year.
I've never been much of one for making resolutions because I never saw a resolution that I couldn't break within a few days.
Instead, I'm looking at more of an overview.
Over the past several months, I've been paring down my outside obligations.
This is a real effort on my part to free up more of my time to tend to matters important to me.
One thing for sure, 2018 is going to have a cold, cold start.
So tomorrow when I don my Ninja hood, I'll battle the cold and face the new year with boldness and optimism.
After all, the hood keeps the wind from hurting my face, and spring will be only 77 days away.
Copyright (c) December 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 24, 2017>
I saw a post this morning, "Please, if you have loved ones in a nursing home try to spend some time with them." This reminder made me think of the five Christmas holidays Jim spent in a nursing home.
One of the disturbing trends I noticed at the nursing home was the lack of family support, especially in the special care unit.
Excuses ranged from "he doesn't know me" to "I can't stand to see her that way."  The family who never visited missed the smiles and bright eyes when a loved one walked through the door.
When I visited Jim, some of the other residents felt that I was there to see them too.
I greeted them by name, commented on how pretty someone's dress was, or offered to get the attention of an aide when they pleaded, "Will you help me?"  "They won't let me help you, but I can get someone who will," I told them.
Christmas time seemed a particularly lonesome time at the nursing home while families celebrated at home.
I was looking through some of my Christmas memories in Indelible (memoir in progress).
Here are some of the Christmas memories: Home for Christmas: Around Christmas time, we drove around town after dark to see the lights.
The state school had an outstanding display with Christmas scenes set up in small buildings.
Christmas music played on loudspeakers throughout the drive.
Eric, Shawna, and the grandkids enjoyed riding through the light display too.
I brought Jim home for Whitney's birthday party and our annual Christmas Eve get-together.
After our Christmas Eve celebration, we drove Jim through the Christmas lights before returning him to the nursing home.
On Christmas day, I picked him up to have dinner at his mom's house.
We made it through our first Christmas with Jim living in a nursing home by making it as close as possible to our normal celebration.
Home for another Christmas: I brought Jim home and helped him out of the van and down the walkway.
He took his usual seat on the reclining section of the couch.
Rob and Colby were playing video games on the TV.
Before long, he yelled, "Hey!" and jumped up and started going toward them.
"I wonder if he wants to play," I said.
At one time, Jim loved video games, and he played Mario Karts long after he developed dementia.
Rob ejected the game they were playing, and inserted Mario Karts into the Play Station.
"Here, Dad," he said as he handed Jim a control.
Jim didn't seem to remember how to use it, so Rob passed the other control to Colby and helped his dad maneuver the one he held.
After a few races, Jim remembered how to run the car around the track, but the master of the game was not competitive.
Christmas at the Home: I wanted to bring Jim home for Christmas Eve, but it was snowing, so I decided it wasn't a good idea.
Christmas Day, I brought Jim a bowl of the chili Rob made for Christmas Eve.
He ate the chili and the ham that came on his plate.
While Jim was in the nursing home, the staff and I did everything we could to make the holiday special.
They decorated for Christmas and provided Christmas cards that they taped to the doors.
I brought a tree and decorated his room.
The staff drew names and gave Christmas presents to the residents.
Jim was wearing his gift, a Dale Earnhardt, Jr. shirt.
I had planned to take down his Christmas tree, but the box was still in the car where I had forgotten it.
The rain pelted against Jim's windows, and I dreaded going back outside.
As I spooned his food, I talked to him.
"Well, I'm not going back out in that crap to get the box for the Christmas tree." Jim's eyes moved toward the tree.
"I guess you'll get to enjoy it one more day." We spent fifteen minutes together Christmas Day 1969 before Jim returned to Vietnam and I flew home.
From then until Jim passed away, we were together every Christmas Day.
I cherish the memories of our Christmases regardless of the setting.
Copyright (c) December 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 15, 2017>
I went to my local post office this week and bought a sheet of Alzheimer's semipostal stamps.
I couldn't help but brag, "My friend, Kathy Siggins, is the one who got the approval for this stamp.
She worked eighteen years to make it happen!" Often, we claim people as friends when they do something extraordinary--something that makes a mark in history.
In this case, I wasn't exaggerating.
I met Sarah Harris, Jane Adams, and Kathy Siggins at the first Alzheimer's forum I went to in 2001.
We forged a lasting and special friendship of the heart.
And guess what?
Kathy was already working on the Alzheimer's semipostal stamp, and was still working on it at the 2017 forum.
Well, frankly, I didn't even know what a semipostal stamp was, or why we wanted, much less needed, an Alzheimer's stamp.
Since then, thanks to my friend Kathy, I've learned quite a bit about them.
Getting a semipostal stamp approved isn't easy.
As you've heard said before...it takes an Act of Congress.
The Semipostal Authorization Act grants the U.S.
Postal Service authority to sell fundraising stamps to further causes that are in the national interest.
They will issue five semipostal stamps over the next ten years, with the Alzheimer's stamp being the first discretionary semipostal stamp.
The second stamp, already approved, is another cause near-and-dear to me: Post Traumatic Stress Disorder semipostal stamp.
Why are these stamps important?
Prior semipostal stamps have raised millions of dollars.
Congress mandated the first semipostal stamp in history for Breast Cancer Research  which raised $86.7 million and a Save Vanishing Species Semipostal stamp that raised $4.3 million.
The Alzheimer's stamp costs sixty cents.
The additional cost of the stamp will go toward Alzheimer's research.
As Congressman Elijah Cummings said at the dedication, this is a "big deal."  Kathy Siggins has been busy lately.
The stamp was released on November 30 and she was a special guest at the official dedication of the stamp.
The Congressman recognized Kathy for her work.
"You turned your pain into a passion and to a purpose." He said it would affect generations yet unborn.
He went on to say, "Your name may never appear on the front page of the Washington Post.
You may not even make the local gazette... By the way, you may never be famous, but there will be people who will benefit from what you did."  The Congressman said Kathy was an example of how "one person who instead of standing on the sidelines of life having a pity party" used her energy to make life better for somebody else.
I've followed Kathy's various events online: award presentations, television interview, dedication parties, and celebrations.
She takes it all in stride.
Kathy has worked toward this day for so long, I'm sure she is filled with exhilaration.
The stamp, thanks to the unwavering efforts of Kathy Siggins, will be on sale for two years.
Buy early and often!
Let this be the only stamp you buy in the next two years.
Kathy and Sarah (back), Linda and Jane (front)  Yes, Kathy, you are our Alzheimer's hero.
Speaking for Sarah, Jane, and myself, we salute you, our sister of the heart, and heap our gratitude and love on you for being the special person you are.
The US Postal Service dedication ceremony: https://www.facebook.com/USPS/videos/10155960281864810/ #AlzheimersStamp Copyright (c) December 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 3, 2017>
I'm not sure where the year went, but it definitely swooshed by.
It's hard to believe it is Christmastime, even with two trees and a complete army of nutcrackers scattered throughout the house.
Holiday movies threaten to overflow my DVR.
They all have a similar theme: a person who loathes the holidays, but magically "gets" what all the fuss is about.
A Hallmark movie can turn the Grinch into a Santa's helper.
Life is not a movie, and not everyone has a magical moment each holiday season.
Holiday sights and sounds greet us everywhere we go, beginning earlier and earlier each year.
All that holiday joy and ho-ho-hoing can be a bit much for those who are dealing with the unpredictable nature of dementia.
Three important lessons I learned throughout my ten Christmas seasons as a caregiver:  (1) simplify sights, (2) simplify sounds, (3) simplify traditions.
For most of his adult life, Jim was pretty much a Grinch about Christmas.
He thought it had become so commercialized that it had lost its meaning.
In some ways, dementia made the holidays a little more tolerable for Jim.
In other ways, it only added to his confusion.
One year, I was putting framed family photos in a box to clear the shelves for Christmas decorations.
Immediately after I cleared the shelves, Jim put the photos back where they had been.
That was my first clue that he wasn't as crazy about the decorations as I was.
More than the decorations, I think it bothered him that I was changing his familiar environment.
I learned to simplify the sights of Christmas.
The holidays can be entirely too bright for a person who is confused.
And it just isn't as much fun for the caregiver to do all the decorating alone and even less fun taking it all down.
Christmas can be a noisy holiday with traditional parties, dinners, and loud holiday music.
When you combine dozens of conversations with music and piles of food, you are just asking for trouble.
Communicating with a loved one with dementia is an acquired skill.
Rapid-fire conversation is hard for a person with dementia to follow and can bring about a negative reaction.
Simplify the sounds of Christmas.
Replace noisy gatherings with soothing traditional music your loved one will remember from his or her childhood.
Simplify traditions by getting rid of the ones you have clung to through a sense of obligation.
If you don't enjoy it, don't expect your loved one to tolerate it.
Do the things that make you happy.
If your idea of a good Christmas is a quiet evening at home, then do it.
Most of the stress of Christmas is caused by trying to meet the expectations of other people.
Those who truly care about you are not going to want to add any more stress in your life.
Simplifying your holiday can bring the joy back to the season.
The spirit of Christmas isn't wrapped up in glittery packages or found in a department store.
The spirit of Christmas is a child wrapped in swaddling clothing, placed in a manger.
The spirit of Christmas is love, peace, and a light that shines within our hearts and souls.
Copyright (c) December 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 26, 2017>
When I was caring for Jim, I showed great confidence.
I tracked his medications, I knew his health history, and we communicated on an almost subliminal level.
Through classes, seminars, workshops, online training, talking to medical professionals, from the Alzheimer's website, and support group, I learned everything I possibly could about Alzheimer's disease.
Knowledge was my weapon against Alzheimer's.
I tracked research and tried to get Jim into promising drug trials.
The major roadblock we ran into was that most required participants to be at least 65 years old.
When I finally found a trial that didn't have the age limit, they had a communication requirement.
Jim lost his ability to communicate verbally early on in the disease.
Still, I was confident that I could find the best medical attention possible, and when it became necessary, I tried to find a good home for him.
Still, I was vigilant, on top of his medical and personal care.
I offered my phone number as their hotline number, day or night.
From time to time, doubt overrode my confidence.
On dark days, I would wonder if I was up to the challenge.
I second-guessed some of my decisions.
At times, I felt like a failure.
From time to time resentment battled with fortitude.
I mentally beat myself up.
Outwardly, I looked competent, but inwardly, I wasn't so sure that I could keep on keeping on.
When things were going wrong, I would wake up with a cloud hanging over me.
I never knew if it was going to rain, or I'd get struck by lightning.
It seemed that most of the time, the sun would come shining through.
Often, nighttime doubts were simply replaced with daytime confidence.
When I took time to breathe, and think rationally, I realized that I was simply a typical caregiver.
In support group, I learned that others had the same doubts I worked my way through.
I never intended to be the best caregiver in the world, only the best caregiver I was capable of being.
In retrospect, I realize that I expected much more of myself than anyone else did.
When Jim first showed signs of dementia, we lived life as normally as we could for as long as we could.
We cherished the good times.
You know what I remember most from the nursing home years?
I remember the walks in the park, the trips to Dairy Queen, the times Jim laughed, the kids and grandkids visiting him, wheeling him around the parking lot on quiet summer evenings, seeing his eyes light up from time to time.
Yes, I remember the little things.
Happy moments ramble through my mind like old photographs capable of bringing smiles or tears, or more often--both.
Copyright (c) November 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 23, 2017>
I woke up this Thanksgiving morning without plans.
For many years, Thanksgiving meant going home to the Lake of the Ozarks.
That's where my mom and dad lived.
Thanksgiving was the one time of the year that my brothers and sisters and our families gathered together.
Since then, our family celebrates "Thanksgiving" in September at various locations, hence no big plans for today.
The memories of those long ago Thanksgivings crowd my mind on this special day.
The table groaned with food, but if you wanted mashed potatoes, you had to get in line ahead of Andy and Derrick.
Jim always had his video camera.
He "interviewed" everyone and one year shot a video of an impromptu football game.
As he showed the video on the TV someone crashed into a small tree.
My dad leaned forward in his recliner, pointed at the TV, and boomed in his "unhappy" voice, "Hey, that's the tree I planted!" Yes, Thanksgiving holds many happy memories, and a few sad ones.
My dad was the one who insisted we all come home for Thanksgiving.
"You can spend Christmas with your in-laws, but the only way we'll all get together is if you come home for Thanksgiving." The year my dad died, I had Jim stop at the cemetery to visit my dad's grave so that he could "see" me on Thanksgiving.
It was almost unbearably sad the first Thanksgiving after Jim was in a nursing home.
That was a long, lonely drive with my mind crowded with memories of Thanksgiving past.
The ten years living with Jim's dementia were the most challenging of my life.
Still, laced throughout that time are many happy memories, loving moments, and tender moments that will always live in my heart.
On this Thanksgiving morning, I browsed my Facebook photos looking for one to share.
As I went down through the photos, I realized that I am truly blessed.
Photo after photo of events, reunions, friends, family--old photos, new photos, old memories, recent events.
I have been blessed with love--unselfish and unconditional.
I've been blessed with the best family ever.
I've been incredibly lucky in love.
My life has taken some detours, but I know I'm in the place right now where I was meant to be.
Of course, I have regrets, but overall everything has worked out and most decisions moved me along the path of my destiny.
I thank God that I've been blessed with an optimistic nature.
It's brought me through the bad times and made me realize that life is cyclical--good times are always ahead.
No matter what I physically do this Thanksgiving, my heart is full of gratitude.
I have health, love, and the best family possible.
All is well.
Copyright (c) November 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 21, 2017>
When I took the dog out this morning, a flock of birds swooped in to sit on the limbs of a bare tree.
They were chirping and flitting around like it was a spring day instead of a prelude to winter.
What would it be like to be free as a bird?
Most of us are trapped in some way.
We are trapped by our mental and physical health, our inertia, our finances, our obligations, or other life circumstances.
I thought about Jim, who was ensnared by dementia.
The hardest part of him being in a nursing home was knowing that he had lost his freedom through no fault of his own.
Jim had always been a free-spirited being.
I paused in remembrance of my brother Donnie who died on this day in 2012.
Strokes  trapped him in his body, and he, too, had to spend his last days in a nursing home.
Donnie cherished his freedom.
The biggest comfort now is knowing they are both free from the circumstances that trapped them in life.
Jim and Donnie left their sorrows and afflictions behind, and they soar on eagle wings, flying higher and freer than any earthly bird.
Copyright (c) November 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 20, 2017>
Ronnie, Leroy, and Jim Fisher I was out walking my dog and the wind howled through the trees, making my face sting.
The temperature hovered at freezing and the wind chill, well, was downright frosty.
I cinched my hood on my coat to keep the wind out of my ears, put on my gloves, and shivered.
The wind made me think of a song I'd been attempting to play on my ukulele:  "The Wayward Wind." In turn, the lyrics made me think of Jim.
I don't know whether he was actually born to wander or whether he acquired "white line fever" throughout his childhood.
Until I met Jim, I never in my life knew anyone who had travelled as much as he did or lived in as many different places.
Or in such strange places for that matter: "We lived under that tree" or "We lived under that bridge." I would have thought he was making it up, but other family members told the same stories.
Jim was happiest when he was on a road trip.
I guess it would only naturally follow that when he developed dementia, he was a wanderer.
It required constant vigilance to keep track of him.
He would be out the door and down the road in a flash.
He was restless and relentless in his pursuit of being where he wasn't.
When Jim's wandering made him too much of a challenge for his mom, my mom, and the hired caregivers, I had a short experience with adult day care.
Jim took his guitar and amused himself by playing and singing--the same song over and over.
I suppose the only ones who really appreciated it were the folks with short-term memory problems that didn't remember it was the same song he'd just finished.
Day care only lasted a couple of weeks.
The day they had to track him down and found him on the highway, carrying his guitar, and headed toward home, they told me they couldn't keep him anymore.
It didn't surprise me that even though he'd had enough of that place, he didn't leave his guitar behind.
His love of music remained in his heart long after it slipped his mind.
The past seven days have been hard on the music industry.
Della Reese and Mel Tillis died.
Sadly, Malcolm Young, AC/DC died from complications of dementia, and David Cassidy, Partridge Family,  who also has dementia, is in critical condition with major organ failure.
Famous musicians leave a legacy of songs.
No matter how long they are gone, their songs speak to the hearts of their fans.
A song can express heart emotions for us that we cannot express otherwise.
Music provides a direct link to our strongest memories.
My mother sings a song she refers to as "Jim's song." When Jim sang "The Way I Am," he sang it from his heart.
One thing I can say for Jim is that he never pretended to be anything other than what he was.
Jim was happiest when he was playing music with his uncles, or cousins.
He often referred to these jam sessions as "picking and grinning." It didn't matter to him if he was playing his guitar, a mandolin, a banjo, or a fiddle.
If an instrument had strings, he played it.
Jim loved the traditional gospel songs.
I will never hear "Lord, Build Me a Cabin in Gloryland" or "Old Country Church" without thinking of Jim.
We went to a country music show in Branson where several people played and sang old gospel songs in the lobby prior to the evening's extravaganza.
Jim was already having trouble speaking by then, but he sang every word with them.
Sunday at church, the minister asked us to join him in singing "Jesus Loves Me." I fought back the tears and sang along.
When Jim was having a really bad day and I was trying to get him to sleep, I sometimes sang "Jesus Loves Me" to him because I knew he would remember that song.
His lips moved and he mouthed the words soundlessly, and I think he found comfort.
It was one of his heart songs, and because of it, he was able to travel in his mind to a simpler time and a place far, far away.
Copyright (c) November 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 10, 2017>
Veterans Day is November 11, but this year the holiday falls on November 10.
At least this year, Americans will think about and honor our Veterans for two days instead of one.
The Capps family did double duty bringing the veteran's perspective to Morgan County Schools.
My brother Tommy, an Army Vietnam veteran.
spoke at Versailles High School and my nephew Charles, a Navy Iraq veteran, spoke at Stover High School.
The reality of war veterans is that the majority of them are wounded warriors.
Some wounds are undeniable because they are visible, like Tommy's wounds.
Others have invisible wounds inflicted by chemicals and other environmental factors.
Agent Orange and chemical exposure during other wars can be passed onto descendents, abroad and here at home.
Equally debilitating are the heart and soul wounds that battle within.
Twenty-two veterans take their lives each day.
I hate to even think how many contemplate suicide or attempt suicide.
I know that Jim contemplated it many times.
There is no hard and fast evidence that Jim's dementia had anything to do with his military service in Vietnam.
I do know that he battled depression throughout most of his adult life.
I also know that he was exposed to Agent Orange.
I know that he suffered from PTSD, including flashbacks.
I know that he had two complete mental breaks that required hospitalization.
I know that he took medication that had long-term detrimental effects on his health.
Exactly how much Jim's military service contributed to his dementia may seem to be more intuitive than proven.
Although I had no luck convincing the VA that there was a connection, science is beginning to catch up with my conviction.
Several studies on veterans who have PTSD (or PTSS as it is now known) indicate that they are twice as likely to develop dementia.
When you consider that 30% of Vietnam veterans and 17% of Iraq and Afghanistan veterans have PTSS, the dementia connection needs to be seriously addressed.
Our veterans deserve more than a pat on the back or a "welcome home" in recognition of their sacrifices for our country.
They deserve the best health care for all their visible and invisible wounds.
As a nation, we have an obligation to reduce the risk of suicide, dementia, and other health problems with a connection to military service.
Veterans are the folks who laid their lives on the line for the rest of us.
Some came home broken and it is high time that the government does everything in its power to make them whole.
Can we ever have war without fatalities and a host of wounded warriors?
Will the world ever be at peace?
Until that utopia, we must take care of our veterans.
Every day needs to be Veterans Day.
Source: https://www.agingcare.com/articles/veterans-might-have-higher-risk-of-dementia-169916.htm Copyright (c) November 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 29, 2017>
Fall is in the air, and when I take the dog out first thing in the mornings, I see frost on the ground and ice on the stock tank.
Each day, I think I'm dressed warm enough for a winter's day, but haven't convinced myself that I'm to the point of needing gloves and a stocking cap.
At least that's how I feel until the wind hits me.
Halloween will be here soon so my thoughts turn to things that scare me.
I know I'm in the age group where Alzheimer's isn't even considered "early onset" anymore.
I'm now included in the scary statistical risk for women over age 65.
One in nine people over age 65 have Alzheimer's disease.
The really scary part for me is that of the 5.2 million people with Alzheimer's, more than 3 million are women.
* A few weeks ago, I wrote about showing up at grandparent's day a day early.
Now, I'm so paranoid about appointments that I keep them in electronic form and write them on the wall calendar.
Yet, I still second-guess myself.
I've been bringing the music for line dancing class while our fearless leader is recuperating from knee surgery.
I arrived early to set up the equipment, and no one was there.
I glanced at my watch to double-check the time and saw that it was still ten minutes early.
I mentally assured myself it was the right day.
Eventually, everyone showed up and I breathed a sigh of relief that I was at the right place, at the right time, and on the correct day.
A few days ago, I opened the microwave and started to put the gallon milk jug in it.
"Oh, my gosh!" I said.
"What was I thinking?" The next day, I shook creamer into my cup because it mixes in better when I pour the coffee.
I opened the refrigerator, grabbed the milk, and started to pour milk on my creamer.
Wouldn't that have been an interesting drink?
Yeah, Halloween is a time to think of scary things, like Alzheimer's and the ten warning signs of Alzheimer's:  (1) Memory loss that disrupts daily life.
(2) Challenges in planning or solving problems.
(3) Difficulty completing familiar tasks at home, at work or at leisure.
(4) Confusion with time or place.
(5) Trouble understanding visual images and spatial relationships.
(6) New problems with words when speaking or writing.
(7) Misplacing things and losing the ability to retrace steps.
(8)  Decreased or poor judgment.
(9) Withdrawal from work or social activities.
(10) Changes in mood and personality, including apathy and depression.
* Scary behavior aside, this Halloween has been special.
My brother and I finally put our twisted tales and yarns together into a book titled Apparitions.
The goal was to have it finished in time for Halloween.
Well, we made it in some respects since the e-book and paperback are available online.
I don't have the copies I ordered yet.
There was a delay while we tried to get the cover to suit us.
Another delay was my reluctance to let the book go live because of my fear that I'd made a stupid mistake during the editing process or missed a simple error.
My husband assures me that my mind tends to jump ahead rather than staying in the present.
It might have to do with mental overload.
I have too many appointments, obligations, and an out of control to-do list.
Multitasking has turned into multi-taxing on my poor stressed out brain.
Halloween is a time of trick or treat.
I've decided to treat myself to peace of mind in regard to turning into an absent-minded retiree.
At least with my optimistic attitude, I believe my occasional odd behavior is from being distracted rather than a sign of early stage dementia.
At least, that's my story and I'm sticking to it.
*source: Alzheimer's Association: 2016 Alzheimer's Disease Facts and Figures, https://www.alz.org/documents_custom/2016-facts-and-figures.pdf Copyright (c) October 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 23, 2017>
How often have you seen an advertisement--weight loss, growing hair on a bald head, miracle cure--where the final statement is: Individual results may vary.
Yep, that is the catchall phrase to get the advertiser off the hook when the product miserably fails to deliver.
It is not just advertisers who promote the cautionary tale about individual results.
When you develop a disease, you may often hear the same comment from your doctor.
Along the way, they've tried to steer you toward the healthy path, but they know that some people defy all the odds, which they refer to as statistics.
I participated in a video conference recently, and the speaker talked about lifestyle as a way to increase your chances of attaining overall health for your body and brain.
Of course, the ideal situation would be a strictly healthy diet, an exercise plan, and mentally stimulating activities.
The downside is that as humans we can't always resist the donut, we're too time crunched or physically drained for exercise, and rather than read a book, it's much easier to zone out in front of our favorite TV program.
Although population in general would benefit, we all know individual results may vary.
We all know the person who smoked, ate junk food, and never left the couch for anything more important than getting a beer out of the fridge.
We may write off these individuals as having a death wish, but sometimes they just go on and on until they reach a ripe old age.
On the flipside, we all know people who eat right and exercise but develop cancer or die from cardiac arrest.
Individual results vary.
Yes, there are exceptions to known statistical risk factors, but as the researcher pointed out: Most of us fall within the middle and how we monitor our health can make a life changing difference.
Lifestyle may be our best defense against Alzheimer's disease and other dementias.
Genetics and environment play a major part in our overall health.
If we are born with genes that increase our chances of developing Alzheimer's, we can't change that.
In some cases, we can improve our environment.
Where we are born and raised can affect our health throughout life.
If we live in an area with air pollution, contaminated drinking water, or unhealthy living conditions, it increases our chances of developing life-changing diseases.
The bottom line is that no pill or treatment is a cure all for any disease.
Hopefully, we are on track to find an effective treatment for Alzheimer's, but even when that happens, how we take care of our bodies and minds can make a huge difference.
When individual results vary, we should strive to make sure our individual results vary toward a positive outcome.
Copyright (c) October 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 11, 2017>
I left early for grandparent's day at my grandson's school so I could go by and visit my mom.
Delays can happen when driving more than an hour, and I didn't want to be late for the 2:10 event.
I  had called Mom as I pulled out of the driveway.
"Would you like to go with me?" I asked.
She was having lunch with my younger sister.
"We'll be home by the time you get to town," she said.
When I arrived, my mom and sister were at Mom's house.
We had a nice visit and a photo op before Mom and I headed to the school.
We arrived at the school at 2:00 p.m. and I sent my daughter-in-law a quick text to double-check the grade he was in.
"I think he's in the fourth grade," I told Mom, "but one year I showed up for grandparent's day and went to the wrong room." My daughter-in-law confirmed that he was in the fourth.
"We're here!" I texted.
Mom and I walked up to the door and pushed the buzzer.
"We're grandparents," I said.
The door unlocked and we went inside.
A woman behind a desk motioned for us to come inside the office.
"Grandparents day is tomorrow," she said, holding up a flyer as proof.
Just then my phone buzzed, "Oh, no," my daughter-in-law texted, "it's tomorrow." I immediately thought of Alzheimer's sign #4 "Confusion with time or place."  Just as quickly I remembered that, occasionally, messing up an appointment is a normal age-related change.
Whew!
Dodged that bullet.
"This is what happens when you retire," I said.
"You lose track of the day of week or the date." Today was the tenth and grandparent's day at school was the eleventh.
Close, but no horseshoe, as the old saying goes.
"You are exactly on time," the woman said as if I needed some reassurance that I wasn't completely in la-la land.
"You're just a day early.
You can come back tomorrow." "I have an appointment tomorrow," I said.
Yep, for 2:15 p.m. no less.
"We have practice tomorrow," my mom said.
She and other family members play music at area nursing homes and they do a final run through before the week begins.
"Could we at least see him?" I asked.
She buzzed his room and in a few minutes, he came down the hall.
We had hugs and a photo op.
"Enjoy visiting with your other grandma tomorrow," I said.
I couldn't help but think going a day early was a lucky mistake.
I was able to spend time with my mom and saw my grandson.
Grandparent's day came a little bit early this year.
Copyright (c) October 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 4, 2017>
I can remember a co-worker who always said getting old was better than the alternative.
She did have a solid point.
Unfortunately getting older does have its pitfalls.
A good day can be defined as one when something isn't aching.
It seems that the older we get the harder it is to jump out of bed in the morning.
I tend to drag myself out of bed and head toward the coffee pot.
After the first cup and a few stretches, I feel almost human again.
It scares me to think that I'm the age now when Alzheimer's isn't even considered early (or younger) onset.
Nope.
I'm solidly into the age where if it happens, it falls into the statistical data as the ages of greater vulnerability.
Although Alzheimer's is a disease and not a normal part of aging, age is still the biggest risk factor.
If that news wasn't bad enough, two-thirds of the Americans living with Alzheimer's are women.
A gene called APOE (apolipoprotein E) regulates lipid metabolism.
Less than five percent of the population has APOE2.
This gene lowers the risk of Alzheimer's.
The most common variant is APOE3 which does not affect risk of the disease.
The culprit is the e4 version that increases the risk of Alzheimer's disease.
Most of us don't know whether we carry the e4 version of APOE.
Jim's neurologist asked to do genetic testing on Jim and I gave permission.
He had one copy of APOE4 and one APOE3.
Gender further increases risk, especially for women.
A study at Stanford University Medical Center in California used brain-imaging studies to determine that a woman with one copy of APOE4 has a much greater risk of developing Alzheimer's than a male with one copy.
A study at the University of California found that women with a genetic predisposition to develop Alzheimer's disease do so at an escalated rate between the ages of 65 and 75.
It is believed that the reason the risk increases for women in this age bracket is because menopause and decreased estrogen begin at about 51.
If you inherit two copies of the APOE4 gene, your risk is even greater.
This too, is not a complete determinant since some who have two copies do not have Alzheimer's and some who don't have the e4 version have Alzheimer's.
People whose parents have dementia often fear developing dementia in their older years.
My dad died when he was my age, but my ninety-year-old mother is as sharp as ever.
I believe part of Mom's success is that she is active and takes almost no medications.
In fact, we're pretty sure she's in better health than my siblings and I are.
The good news is that APOE4 isn't a doomsday diagnosis.
The bad news is that I have entered the ten-year period when women experience a leap in developing Alzheimer's disease.
More good news is that I at least plan to stay active like my mom.
My goal in life is to find that fountain of youth she found and drink my fill.
Copyright (c) October 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 28, 2017>
Here it is autumn already.
The season is catching up with the dead looking leaves on the trees attacked by the Japanese beetles.
Hopefully, we'll get some nice fall colors out of the remaining leaves.
The yard is starting to look like autumn.
We are surrounded by cornfields that have turned golden brown as they quickly approach harvest time.
Yesterday was the first day it was cool enough to think of dragging out the autumn wardrobe.
At least it was a day I didn't feel like I had to wear a sleeveless blouse to keep from melting.
We even had a gentle autumn rain.
I wore a hoodie this morning when I walked the dog.
With her long hair, she seemed to be enjoying the autumn crispness too.
I kept telling myself that I need to get in gear and drag out my fall decorations.
Last year, it was nearly Halloween before that happened.
Unfortunately, decorating often falls into the "I can do that tomorrow" category.
It seems each day I have a list of things that have to be done that day and can't wait until the next.
Or worse yet, the things that should have been done last week...or the week before that.
Catching up happens every year after Walk to End Alzheimer's.
I have a lot of catching up to do.
I tend to let everything else slide in the last few weeks before Walk, and often in the two weeks following.
That means the last week in September and the first week or so in October are times to put on a different hat and catch up on everything I put on hold during the walk.
Every year I look at my September calendar and think...it won't get busier than this.
Then, I flip the page to October and have to take deep breaths before I admit that I'm not going to be caught up until at least November.
I have several days on my October calendar double-booked and two days triple-booked.
I have some serious choices to make.
Throw into that the unknown, unexpected things that happen and October just got really, really scary.
I can't help but wonder what I would do if I ever did actually catch up.
I kind of think that's never going to happen.
Makes me think of what my sister-in-law used to say, "The hurriered I go, the behinder I get." That just about sums it up.
Copyright (c) September 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ #GoJimsTeam
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 21, 2017>
We didn't get any decent tomatoes all summer long.
Harold left for town this morning and gave me a call.
"We have three or four semi-ripe tomatoes." "Okay, I'll go out and pick them," I said.
I walked out to the potted tomato plants expecting to pick a few and bring them inside.
Ripe tomatoes were everywhere.
The saying, "Good things come to those who wait" popped into my head.
You wouldn't think that I'd even think of this expression since patience is not one of my virtues.
Sure, I have a lot of good qualities: empathy, a good work ethic, general optimism, and so forth.
Patience does not make that list.
Nope, not even as an afterthought.
My lack of patience gets me into trouble sometimes.
I get really frustrated when I'm trying to open a file on the internet.
I absolutely hate waiting for that little circle to stop spinning.
Or for an ad to pop up and obstruct my view.
Life is too short to wait, and wait, and wait.
Often, I'll just close it and figure that I didn't really need to know the latest "shock and awe" news story.
Patience.
I know men don't usually have any patience, but everyone expects a woman to have it.
I used to have a certain amount of patience, but I guess years of budgeting my time has zapped what was left of it.
My saving grace is stubbornness, or bull-headedness if you ask certain people.
When I don't have the patience to complete a task, I'm stubborn enough to see it through.
I'm starting to lose patience with a cure for Alzheimer's.
People die every day from Alzheimer's and related dementias.
We can't find a cure soon enough to suit me.
I can't wait for the first survivor.
We thought about that first survivor at the Walk to End Alzheimer's this year.
During the opening ceremony, we hold high pinwheel flowers in various colors to represent the walker's connection to the disease.
I always choose a purple flower because I've lost someone to the disease.
Yellow is the color for caregivers, blue for those who have the disease, and orange for those who are supporters.
This year, a new flower was introduced.
Two young children held up the white flower that represented our hope for the future.
The white flower is for the first survivor.
That person does not exist at this time.
After the ceremony, they gave me one of the white flowers.
I hope before much more time passes, I can take the white pinwheel back to the walk and personally hand it to the first survivor in our town.
I hope to see our walk filled with white pinwheel flowers.
No, I will not patiently wait for the first survivor.
I'm going to be walking, advocating for more research funds, and doing all I possibly can to push, cajole, and become the squeaky wheel.
Patience is not one of my virtues.
I might as well make the most of my shortcoming.
Copyright (c) September 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ #GoJimsTeam
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 11, 2017>
Saturday was my twentieth Alzheimer's Walk.
In 1998 the year of my first walk, four troublesome years had passed from the time I had noticed Jim was having trouble remembering basic information.
Jim had always had an amazing recall for numbers and dates, but had forgotten his social security number.
I thought that strange, but I didn't push the panic button until he admitted he didn't know his birth date either.
After testing, it was determined that Jim had dementia of the Alzheimer's type.
Jim, of course, insisted he didn't have "that," as he referred to it, but when we saw an article about an upcoming "Memory Walk" in Sedalia, he wanted to go.
"I have memory problems," he said.
I had already signed up for the walk and had raised some money, but since Jim didn't have "that" I thought he wouldn't want to go.
We arrived at the first walk to discover we were the only people from Sedalia.
The other walkers were Helen and Chuck from Slater, Joetta and Penny from the Alzheimer's chapter office in Columbia, and Penny's dog, Victoria.
Six people and a dog, and I knew all their names--including the dog.
Saturday, was a different story.
More than three-hundred walkers and thirty-six teams crowded into the highway gardens.
We had professional DJ's, a super sound system, corporate sponsor booths, volunteer shirts, a professional photographer, and pinwheel flowers.
We even had an official playlist of songs.
At the first walk, the closest thing we had to music was Helen's hunting horn.
The highlight of the walk was going into the VFW where a veteran asked Helen to blow her horn.
After she blew her horn, they took up a collection to add to the walk total.
The grand total was $600, almost all of which I had collected from co-workers and friends.
To make my twentieth walk special, I wore my 1998 shirt and my team wore the 1999 - 2017 shirts.
We knew they weren't exactly vintage shirts, but my niece and I laughed about struggling not to call them vintage.
Old, I guess was the correct terminology.
Yesterday, Facebook posted a "memory" from twelve years ago, September 10, 2005.
My son, daughter-in-law and their two kids were at the Memory Walk wearing 2005 shirts.
I smiled at how small the grandkids were, and then I realized that was how small they were when Jim died earlier that same year.
It made me incredibly sad to realize that they lost their grandpa at such a young age, and Jim missed out on seeing his grandkids grow up.
Family was everything to Jim.
He loved being a dad and was over the moon about being a grandpa.
It's hard to believe that I've been doing what I've been doing for twenty years.
I logged my shirts before I took them to the walk to make sure that all the years were covered.
Some of the shirts did not have a year and I had to look at photos to determine which years went with which shirts.
Then, I identified the shirt by what it said: Move; We're on the Move; WALK (in Alzheimer's Logo).
After the walk changed from the Memory Walk to the Walk to End Alzheimer's, the message on the shirt conveyed increasingly positive meanings.
The 2017 shirt, Together We Can End Alzheimer's, told its own story.
When we work together, we can change impossible to possible.
It is shocking to realize that my kids are older than I was when Jim developed those first troubling symptoms.
Time passes so quickly.
Lifetimes come and go.
There have been times in my life when I felt I was walking alone, but more often, I've relied on and been supported by others.
Together, we can accomplish anything.
Together, we can accomplish everything.
Together, we can end Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) September 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ #GoJimsTeam
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 27, 2017>
Today would have been Jim's 72nd birthday.
In honor of his birthday, I wanted to share some of my memories of Jim before dementia.
Jim's uncle introduced me to Jim on a hot summer day in 1968.
I don't know if it would qualify as love at first sight, but it was darned close to it.
He was drafted in September and after training, he left for Vietnam in May of 1969.
Jim liked to say he won me in a craps game.
He came up with the idea that he could take R&R in Hawaii, and I could fly there and we could get married.
The only problem was, neither of us had any money.
Jim decided to take what money he had and shoot craps to finance a honeymoon.
Sure enough, based on the roll of the dice, he had enough money to fund the trip.
We were married at Fort DeRussy on December 20, 1969.
It was a small wedding with the chaplain, Jim, and me.
The witnesses signed our marriage certificate before the nuptials so they could go home.
Jim, being Jim, refused to wear his uniform for the wedding.
He bought some "civvies" for the ceremony.
During the early morning hours of Christmas Day, Jim went back to Vietnam and I flew back to the states.
We began our lives together when he returned home April 5, 1970.
He still had a year's obligation to Uncle Sam so we moved to Manhattan, Kansas.
The couple who had the smallest wedding also had the smallest apartment: one small room with a bathroom.
We had no air conditioning, and I mostly remember the sweltering heat and the two of us sleeping on a twin bed.
In early fall, we moved to a bigger apartment in the same house.
Jim was a family man.
He loved spending time with his family and my family.
We traveled home about every other weekend.
We always drove an old clunker because Jim was a genuine shade-tree mechanic and could keep any vehicle on four wheels running well past its prime.
The army didn't pay much so we learned early on to budget our money.
We always had a savings account for emergencies.
Our entertainment was inexpensive.
Jim would play his guitar and sing, we went for long drives, and we spent a lot of time at Tuttle Creek because Jim loved to fish.
If we really wanted to splurge, we went to the movies or ate at Dog and Suds.
Glen Campbell's song said "Manhattan, Kansas, Ain't No Place to Have a Baby," but we were excited to become parents.
Eric was born at Fort Riley Hospital and cost us a whopping $7.
When Rob was born two years later at Bothwell, we sold my car to pay the $700 bill.
Jim loved to travel, and we often made trips to Oregon to visit relatives and his childhood places.
Later, we went to Colorado every summer to camp in the Rocky Mountain National Park.
Jim was happiest when he "had something to look forward to" code for a road trip.
He would pack the van for days in anticipation of our annual vacations.
Jim was generous to a fault.
He would literally give someone the shirt off his back.
He gave away valuable musical instruments to other family members.
He was stubborn and wouldn't do anything that was against his principals.
He could be exasperating at times.
Vietnam haunted him.
He was mentally and physically broken by his time in the jungle.
He had a fractured neck that wasn't treated until years later.
He had PTSD before anyone knew what it was.
He suffered deep depression and had to be hospitalized twice.
Jim was intelligent, loved to read, play video games, had a wacky sense of humor, was musically talented, and a deep thinker.
He believed in ghosts, the unexplainable, angels, God, and that death was simply closing one door and opening another.
He loved with all his being and was fiercely loyal to those he loved.
He loved his boys, his grandchildren, his parents, siblings, aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews, cousins, friends, and I never, ever, doubted his love for me.
He called me his bride, princess, honey, sweetheart, but never called me Linda.
Of all the things I miss about Jim, I think I miss our quiet times the most: drinking a cup of coffee and talking about the mysteries of life.
I miss the adventures, the comfort, and all the things that made Jim the unique man who stole my heart and held it gently.
Copyright (c) August 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ #GoJimsTeam
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 24, 2017>
As an Alzheimer's blogger, I think a lot about memory and how it often tricks me.
My husband finds that memory tricks, or association, helps him to remember some important fact.
One day last week, Harold asked me to remember a number.
Generally, when he tells me to remember something, I write it down.
That is the only memory trick I know.
It so happened that when he asked me to remember the number, I was outside on the deck drinking coffee and didn't have anything to write with, or on, for that matter.
"Okay," I assured him, "I can remember that." About thirty minutes later, he said, "What was that number I asked you to remember?" "Two-eight-four?" I guessed.
"You are close, but wrong," he said.
"It was two-eight-six."  "Well, if you remembered it, why did you ask me?" "It's really easy to remember, if you remember the first number is two, and if you subtract two from eight, you get six." "Uh, okay," I said.
I really didn't think that would help much.
My most memorable experience with association as a memory trick was a speaker who spoke at an assembly at the College of the Ozarks.
The man, whose name I do not remember, walked around campus and learned the names of a few dozen students.
At the assembly, he had them stand up and he pointed at them one at a time and gave their names.
He explained that he had accomplished this feat of memory by associating the name with a mental reminder.
Later, a student inspired by the speaker's phenomenal memory decided he could learn the trick.
"Everyone calls me Capps," I said.
After that day, he called me "Tops" because he pictured something on top of my head.
Memory problems can create amusement for those of us who are so distracted that we can't remember simple things anymore.
Normal aging accounts for a certain amount of forgetfulness.
My husband thinks my memory problems are because my mind is clogged up with too much trivia.
"It doesn't work like that," I confidently assure him every time he says that.
Short-term memory loss is an early sign of Alzheimer's disease.
Along with short-term memory loss, a person with dementia can't remember all the steps to complete a task.
A strange environment can make this even worse.
One time, we were on vacation and Jim started to make a pot of coffee.
The following excerpt from Jim's memoir Indelible explains how dementia can turn an everyday task into an ordeal:    One morning Jim prepared to make coffee in the in-room coffeemaker.
He picked up the pot, set it down, picked it up, and set it down.
He looked around in confusion trying to decide what to do next.
From the bed, I said, "Put coffee in the basket."   "Oh!
That's right." He added the coffee and then acted as if he expected the coffee to make itself.
"Put water in the pot." He put water in the pot.
"Pour it in the top." He poured it in.
"Turn the pot on." He turned it on.
As soon as the coffee was done, he was back in full form.
He poured the coffee into the thermos, cleaned the pot, and brought me a cup of coffee in bed.
Memory is a tricky thing.
As far as that pesky number, Harold and I were on our way to an appointment and he asked, "Do you remember the number I asked you to remember yesterday." "Two-eight-six," I replied without hesitation.
"What I don't remember is why the number was important." Harold thought about it for a few minutes.
Finally, he broke the silence with, "I don't remember either." Copyright (c) August 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ #GoJimsTeam
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 17, 2017>
I can remember a solar eclipse when I was a kid.
We were warned not to look directly at the sun, but to use a pinhole in a box to see the shadow of the eclipse.
Now, in less than a week, we are going to see a total solar eclipse--a once in a lifetime event.
So how this weird happening is going to shake out remains to be seen.
I live in the area of totality.
That means I can observe the eclipse in my own backyard.
It also means that some of my relatives who live outside the area of totality are going to share in the experience by coming to my house.
That is, if the roads aren't gridlocked with the thousands of folks from the four corners of the United States who plan to flock to the area of totality.
Watching the eclipse isn't something you do on the spur of the moment.
If you plan to look at the eclipse, you must have proper eyewear.
Before we ordered ours, Harold researched the ISO ratings, reputation of the seller, and recommendations from the brightest minds in the world.
His vigilance paid off since our glasses were not among those "recalled" due to being questionable.
All this talk about eclipses reminds me of Bonnie Tyler's "Total Eclipse of the Heart." I visualize a total eclipse of the heart as a heart that is beyond broken--a heart with a shadow hanging over it.
Some events in our lives can hurt our hearts seemingly beyond repair.
When we lose a loved one to an accident, to incurable disease, or from suicide, life ceases to be the same.
During the total eclipse of the heart, it seems that life will always hurt.
I can't think of anything sadder than losing a child or a grandchild.
As hard as it was for me to lose Jim to dementia, I can't even imagine how heartbreaking it was for my mother-in-law.
Our sons were grown when Jim developed dementia, but younger onset dementia or familial Alzheimer's disease can often leave school aged children without a parent.
In the United States, 15.9 million unpaid caregivers provide care for a loved one with Alzheimer's.
Caregiving for a loved one with dementia is more labor intensive than for seniors without dementia.
About a quarter of the caregivers responding to a survey reported they provided 41 or more hours of care a week.
Caring for a loved one with dementia is often a long-term commitment.
According to the NIH and aging trends study, 47.4% provided care for more than six years.
Investing the time and energy to provide quality care for a loved one with dementia is the ultimate act of love.
Caregiving becomes a way of life and when that ends, emptiness fills the space.
The concept that love can be a total eclipse of the heart takes on additional meaning when you learn more about a total eclipse.
The world, as we know it, is transformed into a strange place when darkness falls in the middle of the day and the temperature drops dramatically.
Time becomes your friend as you rebuild your life.
Much like the total eclipse, the shadow gradually moves away and the world is bright and normal again.
A new normal, but normal.
Copyright (c) August 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ #GoJimsTeam
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 8, 2017>
At the National Alzheimer's Dinner in 2013, my mom and I were seated at a table near the stage.
Our table was on the outside edge near some curtains.
"Rhinestone Cowboy" cued up and everyone began to clap in time to the music.
Suddenly, from behind the curtain, several people emerged.
All eyes were on Glen Campbell as he brushed past us smiling and waving his way toward the stage.
Filmmakers James Keach and Trevor Alber were working on the documentary I'll Be Me, the story of Glen's Alzheimer's journey.
They were on hand to present the Sargent and Eunice Shriver Profiles in Dignity Award to Glen Campbell.
Glen was a truly deserving recipient.
His "Good-Bye Tour" and the documentary were unselfish ways of bringing a new level of awareness to a vast audience.
Glen seemed humbled by the award.
His voice broke with emotion when he said, "Everyone's been so good to me throughout my years as a musician.
Thank you for helping me and my family." We sang "Happy Birthday" to the country music star and helped him celebrate his 77th birthday.
I brushed away tears as my heart broke for the years he would be facing.
After the program, Glen posed to have his photo taken with many of the ladies, including my mom.
He was charming and sweet, but I could see his hesitation and hear his halting words as he struggled to adapt to his new reality.
His daughter, Ashley, testified in front of a congressional hearing on Alzheimer's.
Advocates wearing purple Alzheimer's sashes, packed the room.
Ashley's emotional testimony explained the changes in her relationship with her dad.
She said it was hard for him to recall her name.
Their times fishing together no longer lived in his memories.
Two years after the forum, I saw the documentary, I'll Be Me.
My impressions as written in a 2015 blog post:  It brought back memories of Jim's loss of communication and musical skills.
At least only family witnessed Jim's problems and not a paying audience.
The Campbell family told of their struggles to make sure they walked the fine line between the cathartic benefits of Glen performing and being vigilant of him embarrassing himself.
Audiences were tolerant.
If he played the same song twice, so what?
At least they got to see him perform.
Campbell's physician felt that performing on his "Goodbye Tour," doing what Glen loved, helped him maintain the ability to function longer.
Sometimes his daughter, Ashley, had to tell her dad the correct key for certain songs.
During their "dueling" instruments, her with a banjo, him with his guitar, she admitted that sometimes he didn't always follow along.
Glen relied heavily on Teleprompters to remind him of the words to songs he had sung for years.
When watching old family films, Glen asked, "Who's that?" His wife, Kim, gently supplied the pertinent information: "It's you, honey," or "That's your first wife," or "It's your oldest daughter." The film shows the relentless progression of Alzheimer's disease.
By the time of his final performance on stage, Glen did not know it was his last performance.
Cal Campbell said that when his dad performed, "He actually becomes himself again." The story ended with the recording session of "I'm Not Going to Miss You." At this point, Glen is already fading away but his eyes sparkle when he finally gets into the song.
This song really tugs at the heartstrings.
The idea stemmed from Campbell's remark that he couldn't figure out why everyone was so worried about him having Alzheimer's.
He said, "It's not like I'm going to miss anyone, anyway." Glen Campbell's Alzheimer's story was heartrending and, oh, so familiar to millions who have lived a similar story.
Today, August 8, 2017, Glen Campbell ended his courageous battle with Alzheimer's, and the Rhinestone Cowboy rode to his final horizon.
Copyright (c) August 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com #ENDALZ #GoJimsTeam
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 31, 2017>
Sunday morning I took my usual seat for early church services.
A woman came in and sat at the end of the same row.
When the pastor gave us an opportunity to greet each other, I introduced myself to her, and she told me her name.
I recognized Laura's name as one I had seen on the Sedalia walk site.
"Are you involved with the Walk to End Alzheimer's?" I asked.
"Yes, I am!" she said.
We had a brief discussion about walk committee meetings, and then it was time for services to resume.
The sermon was based on Romans 10:15 (NLT) "...How beautiful are the feet of messengers who bring good news!" I know that we may not see physical beauty when we look at our calloused feet, maybe marred with hammertoes, blisters, corns, or bunions.
What we can imagine is the power of these "beautiful" feet to bring about change.
Each year we have about 400 pairs of beautiful feet spreading the not-so-good news about Alzheimer's disease.
Many of the participants in the Sedalia walk have a loved one living with Alzheimer's.
Others, like Jim's Team, walk to honor someone lost to the disease.
Many members of Jim's Team walk to honor other loved ones who have, or had, Alzheimer's.
All these beautiful feet are boots on the ground in the battle to turn Alzheimer's into a national priority.
The walkers' beautiful feet raise awareness and funds to help families coping with Alzheimer's find resources to help them throughout the difficult journey.
At the same time, the Walk to End Alzheimer's helps the Alzheimer's Association fund research grants that explore new avenues toward finding a cure.
New approaches, coupled with prior research, will hopefully build the momentum to find what has thus far been an elusive cure.
Alzheimer's volunteers are a special breed of focused individuals.
It's kind of scary to me to realize how different my life would be if I had not taken that first step to become involved with the Walk to End Alzheimer's.
Because of my volunteer work, I've gained dozens of amazing friends.
Perhaps it was merely a coincidence that Laura sat close to me Sunday morning.
Or maybe, it was divine intervention to bring together two warriors to fight the Alzheimer's enemy.
As we left church on that beautiful day, we paused to talk.
"There's a woman on another team in my line dancing class.
You should meet her too," I said.
I hadn't realized who she was until our instructor Ruth had encouraged the class to participate in the Walk to End Alzheimer's.
She told me she was already walking.
In fact, I had just announced her team, Poppy's Posse, on the radio as the current top fund-raising team.
"I'd like to go to line dancing," she said.
"You should join us.
We have a lot of fun!
Our instructor Ruth is a joy to be around."  While we talked, people from the early services were leaving, and others were streaming in for the next services.
I told Laura the days and time of our three line dancing classes, and while we were talking, Ruth joined us.
"I heard some women were talking about line dancing." Ruth explained that the young man greeting people at the door had gone to the bookstore where she was volunteering to let her know some women were talking about line dancing.
Ruth invited Laura to join us for line dancing exercise class.
Sunday was a day of connections with a dear friend and a new friend, both with beautiful feet to spread the good news that we are on the MOVE to End  Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) July 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 23, 2017>
For the first two years of our marriage, Harold and I drank our morning juice out of mustard-colored Tupperware juice glasses.
One day, I noticed some stunning crystal goblets shoved to the back of the cabinet.
I knew they had never been used because they still had the stickers on them.
Now, wouldn't my tomato juice and his apple juice look so much better in those glasses?
After using the glasses about six months, I managed to break the stem off one of them.
I threw it away and took another one down.
A few days later, I told Harold, "I broke one of the juice glasses." He shook his head and said, "I bet I've had those glasses twenty years." "Well, look at it this way," I, the optimist, said, "since we started using them for juice glasses, you've gotten more pleasure out of them than you did during the entire twenty years you had them." Really?
How much good is something if you never use it?
Anyway, this little incident caused me to think about the expression, "use it, or lose it." That expression can be taken a couple of different ways.
Like so many people my age, I've accumulated so much stuff that I don't use a lot of it.
I basically flunked out of minimalist class because I couldn't seem to "lose" enough stuff.
There is another way that use it or lose it applies to our health.
Lack of exercise is damaging to our minds and bodies.
Oh, sure, we all know about going to the gym to exercise, but do we think about exercising our brains?
We lose a certain amount of physical and mental agility as we age.
When we exercise our bodies, it helps keep us physically agile.
When I was much younger, I went to a wellness seminar.
One woman said, "I walk so that I am able to walk." She had severe arthritis and said that unless she kept moving, she wouldn't be able to.
When I don't feel like moving, I am most motivated to do it.
A few days ago, Carolyn and I were walking into exercise line dancing class and we were talking about our aches and pains.
But we were both there and ready to dance.
Amazingly, I felt better by the end of class.
Mental agility works the same way.
Use it or lose it.
Keeping your mind active doesn't guarantee that you won't develop Alzheimer's, but it may reduce your risk.
We all know how to exercise our bodies, although we may not do it.
You might be a little puzzled as to how to exercise your brain.
As with physical exercise, if mental exercise isn't fun, you won't do it!
To decide on the brain exercise that will work for you, think about the things you always wanted to do, but never seemed to find the time or the motivation to follow through.
Here are a few ideas: 1.
Take a class.
Have you fallen behind on technology?
Check out online or community college classes.
Many colleges offer short courses on a variety of interests.
2.
Learn a new skill or hobby.
After going to a few "painting parties" my sister discovered she had an artist's eye.
She's learning and expanding her skill canvas by canvas.
I decided to try to learn to play the ukulele.
I may never be great at it, but I have a lot of fun and at least my dog enjoys hearing me play.
3.
Read, read, read.
Read for pleasure and for learning.
With a library card, reading must be the least expensive pastime ever!
I don't even need to spend gas money to read.
I browse hundreds of library books online and check them out on my Kindle.
4.
Working puzzles is another inexpensive hobby.
I buy crossword puzzle books and Sudoku books at the dollar store.
I also work the puzzles in the newspaper.
Heck, I've already paid for the paper, so the puzzles are free.
A good way for me to ease into the day is to work on a puzzle while drinking my first cup of coffee.
Exercising your brain is a way to lower your risk of Alzheimer's disease and enrich your life at the same time.
Make your own list filled with things you enjoy.
My goal is to have as much mental agility throughout my lifetime as my ninety-year-old mother has.
The only way to reach that goal is to think, plan, and take action to use my brain every day.
Copyright (c) July 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 18, 2017>
In Missouri, 2017 should be put on the calendar as the year of the Japanese beetles.
Sure, we had some last year and they were a nuisance, but this year they are a plague of biblical proportions.
These voracious bugs started on our grapevine--just like last year--then they moved on to the wild roses, blackberry bush, returned to destroy the apple tree and all the apples on it, attacked the yard trees making them look like autumn instead of summer.
It's a dilemma how to battle beetles.
The traps attract more, and it certainly was tedious to pick them off and throw them in soapy water.
That might work if you had a scattering of beetles, but when they congregate in huge clusters and there are thousands of them, picking seems like an exercise in futility.
So we sprayed a little Seven on them, but mostly we hoped they would move along like they did last year.
But oh, no!
They were way cockier than last year.
One morning while relaxing with my cup of coffee on the deck, I was horrified to see our rose of Sharon bush covered with the foliage eating monsters.
"Okay, they have gone too far!" I told Harold.
I used the remainder of the spray he had mixed, and although it killed hundreds, it seemed that a legion was moving along the front line of the battle to kill the bush.
Harold got serious and bombarded the tree with spray.
That seemed to do the trick.
We had chosen our battle and although they haven't left entirely, the remaining beetles lost interest in the bush.
As a person who is often out of sync with the opinions of those who surround me, I've found that choosing battles has become more important than ever.
It isn't always easy for an outspoken, opinionated woman to do that, especially when so many have lost their sense of civility and respect for their fellow humans.
Choosing battles became an integral part of caregiving.
When Jim was in long-term care, I could count on some residents' family members charging into the memory unit just spoiling for battle.
Nothing was ever done to their satisfaction.
Complain, complain, complain.
I might mention that the biggest complainers were the ones who seldom visited their family member.
Too often, it seemed that since they felt guilty, they wanted to belittle the aides and nurses that tended to the residents.
When these same people saw me feeding, bathing, or providing extra care for Jim,  they would say, "You shouldn't be doing that!You are paying to have that done." In the first place (a) it really wasn't any of their concern what I wanted to do for my husband, and (b) I saw how overworked and unappreciated the aides were.
There were two kinds of aides: the ones that needed a job so desperately they were willing to try anything, and the majority who had a caring nature and whose job was less of a job and more a "calling." The people who stayed were not working solely for a paycheck.
Abuse and neglect of  your loved one should not be tolerated.
Show up for care planning and provide helpful input.
Rather than ranting at the unfortunate person who happens to be nearby, rational conversation with the person in charge is much more effective.
In life, we need to choose our battles.
Instead of waging war against fellow human beings, negotiation may be the key to settling problems.
On the other hand, an all-out battle against Japanese beetles is not only totally acceptable, it may be the only way to save your yard.
Copyright (c) July 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 4, 2017>
My dog goes crazy every time the doorbell rings.
She runs through the house trying to get to the front door ahead of us.
We have to hang onto her squirmy, wiggly body to keep her from running out the door in her over-excited state.
I think she's always hopeful that the grandkids are at the door, but she's ecstatic to see the UPS man too.
A few days ago, I took the dog for a walk.
We went out the back door, but after walking in the oppressive heat, I decided that we would just use the front door since it was closer.
Of course, the front door was locked, and I rang the doorbell so that Harold would let us in.
As soon as I pressed the doorbell, the dog began her happy dance and looked eagerly at the door.
When Harold came to the door, she shot through the door running amok in her eagerness.
I'm pretty sure, she was wondering who the "company" was, never once realizing it was us.
When I was a kid, I remember a song "Company Comin' up the Road." We lived twenty miles from nowhere deep in the Ozark hills, and company was a rare occurrence.
Later, when I became a part of the Fisher family, it was a completely different situation.
It was not unusual to have several different families converge on my in-laws' house.
Virginia was an amazing cook, and she could whip up a big meal on a moment's notice.
She always welcomed family and insisted they sit down at her table to eat the mouth-watering meal she prepared "such as it is." Family time wasn't limited to weekends and holidays.
Any night of the week might involve a spirited card game, a jam session, or coffee and conversation.
Company comin' was expected and an occasion to rejoice.
Times have changed, and so many of the family are gone now.
Recently, Virginia's baby brother Larry passed away, so one less smiling face will be at the reunion this year.
We lived next door to my in-laws for several years.
I always enjoyed the company, but being a person who has to have quiet time, I would sometimes slip away for an hour or so and go to my house.
Most people didn't pay any attention to my comings and goings, but Larry would always smile and say, "You just had to get away for a while, didn't you?" It was as if he was the one person who understood.
Another time after Jim developed dementia, Larry watched the interactions between Jim and me.
"It must be awful hard thinking for two," he said, having another insightful moment.
Life has gone full circle.
Although, we don't live twenty miles from nowhere, we don't have a lot of company.
Sometimes, the dog hears company comin' up the driveway, but usually she doesn't get too excited until the doorbell rings.
Today, when she beat a well-worn path to the door, she was dancing with delight as she greeted the grandkids.
After playtime, she was exhausted and ready for a nap.
After my busy, busy day, I was ready for a nap too.
Copyright (c) July 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, June 23, 2017>
When I walk my dog late at night, I always look at the sky.
I've seen several mysterious lights.
Some of them suddenly zoom across the sky, others disappear.
What are those strange flying objects?
Okay, a disclaimer--I do live close to Whiteman Air Force Base, and they do have some planes that look like they belong in a sci-fi movie.
According to an article I read in the newspaper recently, NASA is on a planet hunting mission.
They have determined that ten new planets exist that have the potential to support life.
They are in a galaxy far, far away, but the possibility exists that beings may be trying to contact us.
How many people believe our planet has been visited by "men in black" is somewhere between 25% and 45%, depending on the source.
So, if you've seen something inexplicable, you are not alone.
Other than visitors from other worlds, we may sometimes feel alone.
It seems we can live "down the road" from a close relative and seldom see them.
We live in a world where many of us do not know our neighbors.
We tend to go about our business and mind our own business.
When I was growing up, it would have seemed sci-fi to believe that someday the entire world would be a few keystrokes away.
Who could have foreseen twenty-four hour TV, or so many channels that we never watch them all?
Still, in the world of connectivity, some of us feel alone.
I believe many Alzheimer's caregivers feel the loneliest of all.
In fact, caregivers may feel like their world has turned upside down, and they have landed in a strange and foreign land.
We each have our own road to travel; our own frontiers to conquer.
We never know how strong we can be until we face an unconquerable challenge.
For me, that challenge was Jim's dementia.
For others it may be cancer, or heart disease, or the sudden death of a loved one.
We never know what the next day, or for that matter, the next hour, will bring.
Earth is our home for a certain time.
We have only a finite number of years to gaze at the stars, fall in love, have children, and visit with our loved ones who may live down the road or across country.
We have things to do--so many things to do--and a short time to do them.
When I walk the dog and look at the heavens, sometimes I feel a chill, or an unexplainable ache.
I see many things at night, and sometimes during the day.
One day earlier this week while the dog and I were meandering across the backyard, I looked up at a blue sky with a few scattered fluffy clouds.
I saw a strange, rectangular white object passing rapidly by.
"Do you see that?" I yelled at Harold.
Of course, he didn't hear me.
Just as I marveled at that object, I saw another.
In a few minutes, they were gone.
I told Harold what I'd seen, and he said, "Probably a weather balloon." Just like my dad, he thinks every strange flying object is a weather balloon.
"What I saw was flat.
Didn't look like any kind of balloon." Oh, well, there's no way of really knowing what the strange flying objects were.
They could have been something from Whiteman AFB, a runaway pair of drones, sheets off a line that decided to go for a thrill ride, or maybe a deflated weather balloon.
Since the objects were unknown, I like to think they might have been a couple of angels making their way toward the heavens.
Maybe, I was the only one looking up during that brief moment of visibility.
At least there were two of them, so neither was traveling alone.
Copyright (c) June 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, June 16, 2017>
My granddaughter was in a production of Dancing to Never Land, and I drove to Jefferson City to watch.
As we were waiting for the program to begin, I remembered to silence my phone.
While we patiently waited for her part, I took photos with my spanking new camera to make sure I could get quality photos.
An hour-and-a half into the program, my phone began to play a happy tune.
What?
How could that be?
Of course, it didn't play its tune during a set change or when the music was loud--oh, no, it was during a quiet time.
Then, it dawned on me--it was my sunset alarm.
Since we've been closing the blinds in the evenings, I don't have my bird's eye view of the setting sun, so I set an alarm to remind me to look.
Turning off the ringer and media sound does not silence the alarm.
Last Sunday I heard a phone ringing during the pastor's message.
It rang, and rang, and rang.
I don't know if the person was deaf, ignoring the ring, or not wanting to call attention to himself by pulling out the phone.
Maybe they thought it was someone else's phone.
That happened to me once many years ago during an Alzheimer's Board Meeting with my first cell phone.
I could hear a phone ringing and thought, "How rude!" Except, when I reached my car I saw I had missed several phone calls.
My son wanted me to know that we were under a tornado warning.
He didn't know I was in a different town at a meeting.
Then, there's always the talker that won't stop when a prayer begins.
They are way too involved in a conversation to notice everyone has fallen into silence.
How annoying that all you can hear is their conversation instead of the prayer.
When some people are alone, they have to fill their home with noise--the TV, radio, or some other racket--but I always loved the quiet.
I've never found anything more soothing than the sound of silence, or the quiet sounds of a country night.
I'm not the only one who reveres silence.
Others have provided poetic and practical observations about silence:  silence is golden, listen to silence--it has much to say, speak only if it improves the silence, silence speaks louder than words, silence says it all... I saw a TED talk on noise.
Julian Treasure said that most noise in our lives is accidental and unpleasant.
Noise affects us physiologically, psychologically, cognitively, and behaviorally.
Silence or soothing noises can improve productivity and improve mood.
After leaving a party where dozens of conversations are going at once, walking out of a noisy restaurant, or shutting off a too-loud TV, I retreat into my favorite environment of stillness and relaxation.
My mind thinks, "What a relief!" I'm in my element when all I can hear are the blessed sounds of silence.
Copyright (c) June 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 7, 2017>
I was at the grocery store a few days ago and the woman at the checkout asked me if I liked purple.
Now, how did she know that?
Well, let's see--purple Alzheimer's shirt, purple bracelet, purple nails, purple shoes, purple purse... "Yes, I do," I said.
"Purple is the Alzheimer's color and I plan to wear purple every day in June for Alzheimer's and Brain Awareness Month." Tuesday was a complete Go Purple day for me.
Not only did I wear purple, I spent the day with Paige from the Greater Missouri Chapter on Alzheimer's related activities.
First, we taped shows on two different radio stations, we contacted several businesses about teams and corporate sponsors, and we found a venue for an August program and care consultation.
The day went really well and I found the enthusiasm and support to be a refreshing change.
The Alzheimer's Association has a one-day event called the Longest Day.
Of course, the longest day of the year is in June and this year, the fundraiser is celebrated on June 21.
The Longest Day is about love for those affected by Alzheimer's disease.
People participate in an activity they love--playing games, exercising, sports, hobbies--and while they enjoy their activity, they raise funds for the Alzheimer's Association.
The Longest Day is a perfect fit for the Alzheimer's Association.
Caregivers can attest to the intensity and length of each caregiving day.
The most well-known family guide about Alzheimer's and related dementia caregiving is called the 36-Hour Day for a reason.
Any Alzheimer's caregiver can tell you why.
By June, I'm always working on the Alzheimer's Walk and have never fully participated in a Longest Day team.
I believe this would be a great opportunity for someone who isn't involved in the Walk to End Alzheimer's, but wants to help support the Alzheimer's programs.
Of course, I'd encourage everyone to participate in the Walk to End Alzheimer's.
We are always pleasantly surprised to see people we weren't expecting show up on walk day.
Our walk committee has been small for several years.
The same core group has faithfully taken on the task of making the walk a well-attended community event.
As it gets closer to walk time, we hope to grow our committee.
Many hands make light work.
We've always been fortunate to have event day volunteers, but fresh ideas and new perspectives are always welcome.
We want our walk to be better each year!
I hope you get a chance to participate in the Longest Day or a Walk to End Alzheimer's no matter where you live.
You can go to act.alz.org to find information about the Longest Day and/or find a walk near you.
You can help in many ways--you can volunteer for the committee, start a team, join a team, support a team, or show up on walk day, make a donation, and enjoy.
In the meantime, remember to Go Purple!
When someone asks you if you like the color purple, it is your opening to create awareness for the five million in the United States who have Alzheimer's and the fifteen million family caregivers.
Copyright (c) June 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 27, 2017>
In case I'd forgotten this was Memorial Day weekend, I was reminded by the bumper-to-bumper traffic in town yesterday.
Our town sets between Kansas City and the Lake of the Ozarks so every summer weekend we are in the cross-hairs of tourists.
Memorial Day and Labor Day turn Limit and Broadway into parking lots.
I don't suppose most of those people are headed to cemeteries to decorate graves of loved ones.
Decoration Day was established to honor Americans who died in wars, but has evolved into a weekend of fun in the sun and store-wide "Memorial Day Sales!" Yep.
The way to honor those who made the ultimate sacrifice is to celebrate and buy bargains.
Memorial Day is most definitely a red-white-and-blue day right down to sales ads for clothing, hardware, lawn furniture, and every other consumerist purchase possible.
I remember when as a working person, Memorial Day was the first official holiday of the year.
I admit that after our annual run to place flowers on the graves of loved ones, we spent the rest of the weekend pursuing some sort of fun activity.
Now, the highlight of Memorial Day is to attend the ceremony at the Veterans Cemetery in Higginsville and place flowers for Jim in front of the columbarium.
Many of the graves at the cemetery hold the bodies or ashes of those who died fighting for this country.
Others, like Jim, didn't die in the war, but as one veteran said at a Vietnam program, "I died in Vietnam; I just didn't know it." That's what happened to Jim.
Taking human life stole part of his soul and left it lying in the jungle beside the fallen.
His life was never the same after he saw the lifeless bodies taken down by his M16.
Jim had PTSD before we knew it even existed.
When dementia faded his short-term memories, Vietnam clamored to the forefront of his mind.
Did you know that 3:00 p.m. local time is set aside on Memorial Day as a national moment of remembrance?
At the appointed time on Monday, pause, remove your ball cap, and bow your head for the 1.1 million American soldiers who have died for this country.
Maybe a fun-filled weekend is the way to honor those who made the ultimate sacrifice to keep this country free.
It's a time to think about what is right about our country instead of what is wrong.
This patriotic weekend is a time of remembrance.
The most important thing we should remember is that our freedom wasn't free.
Copyright (c) May 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 26, 2017>
Linda at Roast The 2017 Greater Missouri Alzheimer's Association's roast was a roaring success.
I can't help but think a person must be quite comfortable in his skin to allow a group of people to "roast" him.
Or as the emcee, Bob Pugh put it, "sear him" on first one side, then the other, before roasting him to well done.
I was assigned a seat at the "Hawk" table along with my new friend, Kathleen.
We were glad to see each other since we were the first two at the table, and both of us wondered if we'd be seated by anyone.
"Are you a Hawk?" she asked me.
"No," I admitted.
We wondered what a "Hawk" was.
"Well, if they don't show up, we can eat their desserts," she said.
We were joined by a charming gentleman who said he was not a Hawk, but eventually, the Hawks joined us--a husband and wife team.
Everyone else at the table personally knew the roastee, Mark Fenner, CEO of MFA Oil, which made the experience even better for me.
Mark and the roasters looked quite dashing in their purple tuxedos.
The evening was filled with good-natured ribbing, including Mark teasing a donor for selling a $10 million business, but donating "only" $25,000.
The roast was topped off with a guitar and a sing-a-long.
Laughter as a benefit correlates to the benefits of laughter.
I can't think of many people who need laughter more than caregivers.
The health benefits of a good chuckle cannot be taken lightly.
According to Mayo, laughter is the ideal stress buster.
A good laugh: *         Lightens your load mentally.
Laughter relaxes you, and reduces your stress hormone levels, and releases neuropeptides to fight stress.
*         Eases physical pain.
Laughter triggers the release of endorphins, nature's feel good chemical.
*         Improves cardiac health.
The American Heart Association believes humor can help your heart by reducing artery inflammation and increasing HDL cholesterol.
We have good and bad cholesterol.
The easy way to remember which is which is "H"DL is the "happy" cholesterol and "L"DL is the "lousy" cholesterol.
Laughter is good for body and spirit.
It gives you short-term and long-term benefits.
Having a good laugh every twenty-four hours is just what the doctor ordered!
I easily stored up a week's worth of laughter at the roast.
It was good to spend an evening with long-term friends I've met over the years, and with new friends I met for the first time at the roast.
I can't think of a better fundraiser than one that is fun.
Beneath the laughter was the serious business of raising money to provide our chapter's outreach and to laugh our way to a world without Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) May 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 18, 2017>
I was carrying my Mother's day potted dahlia up the deck steps when I tripped on the steps and fell.
I smacked my elbow, knee, and scraped my foot.
It was a little shocking to find myself down, but I dusted myself off, moved my limbs without pain.
It seemed the only visible damage was a toenail torn halfway off.
I was luckier than my sister-in-law who had fallen over the weekend and fractured her hip.
Unfortunately, I had landed on the plant, crushing the plastic pot and breaking off a few of the flowers.
We re-potted the plant, and I believe it, too, will recover.
These two falls made me think of all the times Jim fell.
As I worked on his memoir Indelible, it became apparent to me that he had fallen more times than I remembered.
None of Jim's falls resulted in broken bones, but he often had bruises, swelling, and cuts that had to be stitched.
Jim's main problem seemed to be balance.
After several falls, he eventually used a merry-walker, a device that looks much like a baby walker for adults.
He even managed to flip the merry-walker from time-to-time and the nursing home weighted it down.
At one time, he was falling out of bed, so they placed it on the floor.
Up until the last several months of Jim's life, I was able to take him for walks.
I held onto him, and he seemed to do pretty well.
Once he began to tilt his head back most of the time, I had more problems keeping him balanced.
Eventually, our "walks" involved pushing a wheelchair around the parking lot.
A myriad of problems associated with dementia can increase the risk of falling.
Dementia causes problems with balance and gait, confusion, vision and perception, and, of course, the ever present medication.
According to the CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), nearly 32,000 people died from unintentional falls in 2014.
Injuries from falls are the most common accidental death for older adults.
Six out of every ten falls happen at home.
NIH (National Institutes of Health) has some suggestions to make our homes safer while we go about our daily activities.
Slick floors and poorly lit stairways are two examples of hazards.
NIH lists these factors that can lead to falls: (1) loose rugs, (2) clutter on the floor or stairs, (3) carrying heavy or bulky things up and down stairs, (4) not having stair railings, and (5) not having grab bars in the bathroom.
If you want a to-do list:  *         Remove safety hazards.
It is easy to trip over electrical cords, clutter, dog dishes, or small furniture.
One time as I was knocking down cobwebs, I tripped over a footstool.
*         Improve lighting.
Make sure bulbs are bright enough that you can see where you are going.
Have a lamp at your bedside, night-lights throughout your home, and keep a flashlight handy.
*         Install handrails and grab bars.
Stairs and bathtubs are prime spots for accidents.
Having something to hang onto reduces the risk.
*         Move items to make them easier to reach.
As a short person, I applaud this idea.
Almost everything is out of my reach!
Having a recent fall makes me more aware of the danger.
I had a really bad fall on ice one time and my first thought was that I was going to die, my second thought was that I had "broken" my head.
Ice is another story for different season.
For now, let's work on those indoor hazards that might catch us unaware.
Copyright (c) May 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 9, 2017>
Setting a goal is the first step to success.
If you don't know where you are headed, you don't really know when you get there.
In the year 2001, our local Alzheimer's Chapter Executive Director Penny Braun asked if I'd like to go to Washington, D.C., to the Alzheimer's Forum.
"We're asking for research funding," she told me.
"The goal is one billion dollars." "Well, we need to find a cure, and I don't mind asking for a billion dollars," I said with full confidence.
It wasn't long before I discovered that research funding was way short of a billion dollars.
Alzheimer's was pushed firmly to the back burner and funding was so tiny it barely made a blip on the NIH budget.
So year after year, I packed my bags and went to D.C. with that illusive billion-dollar goal in mind.
I can remember being challenged with, "And just where would we get that money?" and "We can't 'earmark' NIH funds." We inched a little higher, except for some of the tight budget years when we lost ground.
Things began to look up when the National Alzheimer's Project Act was approved in 2010.
This act required the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services to annually update the National Alzheimer's Plan.
The plan laid out a goal to prevent or find an effective treatment by 2025.
The Alzheimer's Accountability Act of 2015 required scientists at NIH to submit an annual Alzheimer's research budget to Congress.
This is known as a "bypass budget," and it lets Congress hear what scientist think should be in the budget for Alzheimer's research to meet our goals.
They determined that if NIH invested $2 billion in research, we could meet the goal.
It wasn't easy to jump research funding from the mid-millions to $2 billion.
It wasn't an easy sell, and it seems there was always a medical crisis that got the billions to stop them while the five million people with Alzheimer's waited for a cure.
Alzheimer's advocates are determined people!
Alzheimer's disease costs our country $259 billion annually, but research dollars have traditionally been tight.
In 2015 (FY 16), we received a historic $350 million increase.
Once this increase was appropriated, the annual research budget was closing in on the billion-dollar mark at $991 million.
In 2016 (FY17), the Senate Appropriations Committee requested a $400 million increase which would bring our total to $1.4 billion.
We celebrated with the appropriations chair Senator Roy Blunt at the 2016 Alzheimer's Forum.
Then, this year, we received the bad news that NIH's overall FY17 budget would be cut, and our historic increase was in jeopardy.
We knew we were fighting an uphill battle to reach our goal.
We weren't sure if we had been successful, but our champions vowed to fight for us.
Once the budget was approved, my inbox was filled with "hip-hip hoorays" as Alzheimer's advocates cheered the success of reaching our research goal.
In his letter to advocates, Alzheimer's Association CEO Harry Johns said, "This has been a historic week for the Alzheimer's Association, the Alzheimer's Impact Movement (AIM) and our cause.
As you know, on Monday, congressional leaders from both parties and both houses of Congress announced that the 2017 federal government funding bill includes the largest increase in history for Alzheimer's research, $400 million.
Today, the president signed that increase into law, bringing Alzheimer's research funding at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to nearly $1.4 billion."  First goal reached (around at least since 2001): research funding of $1 billion.
Next goal: finding a cure by 2025, or sooner!
The sooner, the better.
Keep an eye on the goal.
Copyright (c) May 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 30, 2017>
It was pouring down rain, but my cousin Reta was in town from Texas.
The plan was to go to my mom's house at Versailles, and then Mom, Reta, and I were going to drive to my brother Mitchell's house for a jam session.
My brother Jimmy and my sister-in-law were going too.
Saturday morning I called my mom.
"Are we still going?" I asked her.
My phone had lit up time-after-time with AccuWeather's areal flood warnings.
"Yes, Jimmy says we're still on." "Okay, I'm on my way, but if water is across the road, I'm turning around." I'd always been afraid to drive into water, especially on Sinkhole Road where I'd lived until a few years ago.
Radar showed a swath of rain covering most of the state and the entire area included in my travel plans were a bright red.
As I drove in a pouring down rain, I noticed impromptu lakes in fields and ditches that looked like mini-rivers, bank full.
My wipers worked overtime to keep the splish-splashing rain off my windshield.
After a grueling drive, I pulled into the parking lot next to my mom's and turned off the engine.
The wipers kept going.
How odd.
I turned the car on; shut it off.
Wipers swished merrily along.
How great is that?
I couldn't imagine getting out of my car and leave the wipers running.
I called Harold.
"Take the key out," he said.
The wipers kept going.
I couldn't get them to turn off.
The rain came down harder.
Harold called the car dealership, and they said I'd have to bring it in for them to see what was going on.
Great.
That would involve driving an hour back home.
"Well, I'm going in to visit Mom anyway." I put on my raincoat and opened the door.
The wipers shut off.
I crossed the parking lot and splashed through the water pooled on the sidewalk in front of Mom's door.
"Well, I'm not going anywhere else," I announced as I removed my coat, thankful I'd worn my waterproof boots.
My jeans were drenched.
Mom called my brothers, and they were fine with the cancellation.
"I think it was a sign when the wipers wouldn't shut off," I said.
The constant rain and "severe" flash flood warnings were other signs.
Sometimes, we have to pay attention to clues.
Sometimes gut feelings tell you not to do something, and it pays to heed the warning.
I can easily think of several times I had gut instincts about people.
When Jim and I were first married, a "salesman" came to our door and wanted to know if my husband was home.
"Yes, he is.
Do you want me to get him?" I asked through the locked storm door.
I turned away as if to get Jim, closed and locked the door.
The man practically ran to his vehicle and sped away.
Researchers say that our subconscious minds notice something is slightly out of kilter; dopamine neurons alert us to this.
Bottom line, there's a scientific explanation why we sense danger.
Our brains are our early-warning systems.
Jim was an intuitive thinker and believer in gut feelings before he developed dementia.
Many of the symptoms related to Alzheimer's disease may be due to a massive disturbance in dopamine regulation in the brain.
One of the jobs of dopamine is to regulate the flow of information to different areas of the brain to aid cognition.
Some researchers believe dopamine is responsible for many of the non-cognitive symptoms in neurodegenerative brain diseases, including anxiety, depression, apathy, and mood.
A "sign," intuition, gut feelings, whatever you want to call it--I take heed.
After I'd been at Mom's for about an hour, a bad storm blew through.
Thunder, lightning, and a strong wind, made us all glad that we'd stayed put.
Out of control windshield wipers helped keep my trip shorter and had me headed toward home earlier.
After our visit, I returned home in a rain that caused floods, which in turn, were responsible for cars being swept away.
I breathed a sigh of relief when I pulled into my garage and shut off the engine.
What about the windshield wipers?
They stopped immediately, as they had every other time until today.
Copyright (c) April 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 16, 2017>
The lilacs are in bloom and every time I walk out onto the deck, I smell them.
Lilacs and April are two reminders of Jim.
He left this world on April 18, 2005.
The lilacs reminded me of a story Aunt Nita shared at Jim's services: "I remember a time a few years ago when Jim and I were sitting in the swing.
It was in early spring; we had been talking, but not a lot.
Jim got up and said, 'Aunt Nita, do you smell that?' He walked over to a big lilac bush and picked a handful.
He brought them back to me and said, 'Smell this, Aunt Nita.
Don't they smell good?' Remembering Jim, I always do, for I know he is one of God's chosen few." When we were planning Jim's services, I took a yellow pad up to Virginia's house and asked everyone to tell me stories about Jim.
I wrote the stories down, and I was still typing them when Gary Richardson came to our house to go over the memorial service.
Gary pushed the paper back to me and said, "Tell me these stories." I told Gary the stories, and he said, "Those are wonderful stories, but if I read them, they are just stories.
You lived those stories, and if you tell them, they will come alive."   Jim, Easter, circa 1999 Rob and Eric both agreed and said that I should tell the stories.
My first thought was that I couldn't do it, but after more thought and encouragement, I decided I could do it.
That is if everyone put on his or her "happy" face.
Some of my favorite memories of Jim involved travel and music.
Here are a few of the stories I shared:  Jim's favorite place to vacation was Estes Park, Colorado, and the Rocky Mountain National Park.
We went to Colorado fourteen consecutive years.
Jim was happiest when waking up on a cold Colorado morning, making a pot of coffee on the camp stove and cooking breakfast.
I loved the cold mountain mornings too, but not quite as much as Jim did.
I would snuggle beneath the covers in our bed in the van.
Jim would bring me a cup of coffee in bed and sing the sleepy head song to me... Music was important to the entire Fisher family.
Jim was talented and could play the guitar, fiddle, banjo, mandolin--anything with strings.
He enjoyed playing music with his dad, uncles, brothers (Bob and Billy) and a good friend, John Cook.
Sometimes music could get the Fishers in trouble and could almost cause fights.
One time when Jim was playing his guitar, and Uncle Jewel was playing the fiddle, Billy sneaked up behind Uncle Jewel and goosed him.
Uncle Jewel jumped, hit Jim in the head with the fiddle bow, knocked Jim to his knees, and gashed his head open.
Uncle Jewel got mad, Jim had a dazed look on his face, and for some reason, Billy, who caused the ruckus, was the only one who thought it was hilarious.
Jim liked to hear Mom and me sing "Mansion Over the Hilltops." The words describe wanting a mansion, a harp, and a crown." Jim wasn't the kind of person who would want a mansion, or a crown, but he would want that harp, because it has strings.
I can just hear Jim playing "Buckaroo" on the harp.
I bet Heaven never heard anything else quite like it.
Copyright (c) April 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 10, 2017>
Linda and Ted, Caregivers At line dancing class recently, we danced to the song, "Life Is a Dance." As I listened to the words, "learn as you go," I was reminded of my years as a caregiver.
During the decade of Jim's journey, I truly learned as I went along.
I certainly wasn't a professional caregiver, nor did I ever believe I would ever be a caregiver for my husband.
His Alzheimer's type of dementia was a progressive disease where the caregiving became incrementally more difficult.
Becoming a competent caregiver involved a lot of baby steps.
I learned the basics, sought out more refined information, and eventually I became creative.
One thing  I learned early on was that a solution that worked one day, might not work the next day.
The physical part of caregiving--feeding, bathing, providing personal care--can be difficult, but it was the grief and emotional despair that I found the most difficult.
The biggest struggle wasn't how to coax Jim into a bathtub; it was the heartache of remembering a time when it was "you wash my back and I'll wash yours." Often the small losses are the hardest to accept.
I expected to grieve big losses, but chided myself mentally for missing the companionable quiet moments.
One of the things I missed the most was having coffee and conversation with Jim.
We caregivers learn as we go--learn how to handle behaviors.
One of the challenges for caregivers is how to handle the baffling behavior brought on by a dying brain.
A three-step approach can be used to address behavior problems: 1.
Identify and examine the behavior.
Is the behavior harmful to your loved one or others?
If the answer is no, consider ignoring it.
Your two most helpful tools are redirect and distract.
To avoid behavior problems, think about what happened before the behavior and what happened immediately after.
Could something have been done differently to avoid the problem?
For example, if your loved one removed all his clothing, was he too warm?
Was he wet?
Was his clothing uncomfortable?
Become a detective!
2.
Explore potential solutions.
Was your loved one's needs being met?
Could surroundings be changed to make your loved one more comfortable?
How could you have changed your reaction?
3.
Try different responses.
Try to respond in a calm, supportive way.
Your tone of voice and body language are more important than your words.
Avoid treating your loved one like a child.
Be respectful.
If what you are trying doesn't work, try something different.
When dealing with behavior, remain calm, patient, and flexible.
You will have better luck if you respond to the emotion and not the behavior.
Don't argue with a person who has dementia.
That is an argument you won't win!
Sometimes the cause of behavior is something as simple as a side effect of medication, or an illness.
Jim became combative when a new physician gave him an antipsychotic drug.
He reverted to his normal demeanor once the medication was stopped.
Caregivers learn as they go.
Being a caregiver is one of life's biggest challenges, but your reward is the knowledge that you have done everything possible to improve your loved one's quality of life.
Copyright (c) April 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 1, 2017>
Linda Fisher and Congresswoman Hartzler What is it that brings me back to Washington, D.C., year after year?
It's not the cherry blossoms.
It's not the Smithsonian or the monuments.
It's not the food, although after a meal with my besties--Jane, Kathy, and Sarah--at the historic Old Ebbitt Grill, I created a hashtag: #eatingourwayacrossDC.
The reason I come to D.C. every year is to join with like-minded advocates who are good and tired of the heartbreak of Alzheimer's.
We think it's darned time to find a cure.
Each year we are joined by an influx of first-timers.
The Alzheimer's Association and those of us with the multiple stars on our badges do everything we can to make sure they are prepared for the Hill.
Once they have the information and the "collateral" they put on their comfortable walking shoes and head to the Hill where many voices will share the same message.
I believe 1,300 purple sashes make quite a statement on Capitol Hill.
As I went from appointment to appointment on Hill Day, we were the most visible group around.
Advocates from across the U.S. visited the offices of their senators and representative.
The 23-member Missouri advocates first appointment of the day was a coffee at Senator Roy  Blunt's office.
We boarded the first bus leaving the hotel and arrived at the Hill in time for the 9:00 appointment.
That is, it would have been time enough except for the long line of people trying to get through security.
As we stood in a non-moving line, we were directed to a different door so that we arrived in the nick of time.
After a photo with the Senator, we visited with his health aide, Desiree Mowry.
Desiree Mowry and Betty Johnson After our visit with Senator Blunt, we split up.
Some had house appointments and had to travel to the house side of the Capitol.
Others of us, the "A" group (we referred to ourselves as the A-Team) moved to the Hart building where we would meet with Emma Kenyon, Senator Claire McCaskill's legislative aide.
After that visit, several of our group headed home, but I had an appointment with Congresswoman Vicky Hartzler in the afternoon.
Our "ask" this year was two-fold.
First, we asked for a $414 million increase for Alzheimer's research.
This is the amount that scientists at the NIH submitted as a "Bypass Budget" proposal.
Based on the Alzheimer's Accountability Act passed in 2015, this is the amount to keep us on track to prevent or develop an effective treatment by 2025.
The second ask was for co-sponsors for PCHETA (Palliative Care and Hospice Education and Training Act).
PCHETA (SB 693, HB 1676) is so important that more than 40 groups are working toward passage.
Nursing home residents who receive palliative care at the end of life are 15 times less likely to die in a hospital.
Palliative care reduces emergency room visits and hospitalization.
This Act would (a) increase the palliative care and hospice workforce by establishing training programs, (b) launch a national campaign to inform patients, families, and health care professionals about availability of services, (c) enhance palliative care research.
Add your voice to our voices.
Email, write, call your senator and representative to support research funding and PCHETA.
For $20, you can join the Alzheimer's Association's sister organization AIM (Alzheimer's Impact Movement).
AIM (1) advocates for legislation to advance research and enhance care and support for those affected by Alzheimer's, (2) supports the re-election of our Congressional champions, and (3) speaks on behalf of the Alzheimer's community when 501(c)(3) organizations like the Alzheimer's Association must remain silent.
Join AIM at the link below using my referral code.
Just a few minutes of your time can make a lifetime of difference for three of your fellow Americans who developed Alzheimer's in the time it took you to read this article.
Copyright (c) April 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com *To join AIM: https://www.alzimpact.org/join/join_aim/code/1328a9afa5/method/link
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 25, 2017>
This year marks my seventeenth trip to D.C. to join my voice with fellow advocates at the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum.
Essential preparations for this annual journey began on Wednesday with laundry.
It seemed that most of the clothing I planned to wear was in need of laundering.
Thursday, the packing began and I felt pretty good when I went to bed at midnight.
My suitcase was full.
Friday morning was going to be easy-peasy.
All I had to do was make a few final preparations, grab my bags, and head to the airport to spend the night at a hotel.
The first problem was I shut off my alarm and overslept.
I took the dog out and then it was time to sign in to get my boarding pass.
My sign in wouldn't work.
I decided to ask for a new password and my security questions weren't correct.
What?
I was giving the only answers.
After much agonizing, I realized I was entering an incorrect password and once I corrected my error, I was in.
The few preparations turned into hours.
I took my PC downstairs to hook into my color printer and it wouldn't work.
I couldn't figure it out, so Harold came down and after a few manipulations, declared that I didn't have it plugged in correctly.
I hate it when that happens.
Back upstairs, I prepared to leave--about four hours after my target time.
"Just sit down and relax a minute before you leave," Harold said.
"Otherwise, you'll forget something important." "I'll go over my checklist," I said.
The checklist looked good.
Then Harold started asking about this and that...he thinks of everything.
Of course, he's the planner; I'm the seat-of-the-pants person.
Eventually, he managed to think of something I'd forgotten.
"What would you do without me?" he asked.
"Go off half cocked all the time," I admitted.
When I headed out the door, it was raining, and the car clock told me that my timing was perfect to hit Kansas City right at rush hour on a Friday night.
Oh, brother.
By the time I reached I-70, rain was pouring and the traffic was pretty well bumper-to-bumper.
At one time, I looked in my rearview mirror to see a semi tailgating me.
My windshield began to fog, and my wipers were working their butts off to keep the rain from interfering with my vision.
I called Harold for a weather report.
"You should be running out of the rain by the time you reach Kansas City," he said.
The radio was on a country music station and I found the music to be soothing.
I turned up the radio and karaoked to my heart's content.
Once again, meteorologist Harold was correct.
When I reached the city, the rain cleared just in time for a weird traffic jam on I-435.
Finally, I reached the hotel and everything was better.
I checked into a beautiful room and although Harold had told me of all the fabulous restaurants nearby, I ate at the hotel.
I was famished and the turkey club with "house" made chips tasted wonderful.
After giving myself a mani-pedi, I decided to make a cup of tea.
First problem, no cups.
I called housekeeping and that problem was solved.
I was darned ready for a good night's sleep.
After all, the next day was going to be a long one.
After sleeping soundly for a few hours, I woke up at 4:30 and couldn't go back to sleep.
I decided to make a cup of coffee and relax for a while until time to catch my flight.
I poured water into the coffeemaker, put Coffee-mate in the cup, and turned it on.
The pot stopped gurgling, but when I checked, all I had was hot Coffee-mate water.
I had neglected to put in the coffee.
Second time, I did everything right except I forgot to turn on the pot.
Finally, I sat down with a cup of coffee and decided I would get ready and head to the airport.
After such a rocky start, the rest of the trip would have to be smooth skies.
By mid-afternoon, I'd be in D.C. and have a few days to see the sites and spend with my friends.
So, I grabbed my purple suitcase and set off for another round of fighting to end Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) April 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 22, 2017>
At a funeral recently, the pastor referenced a book of Psalms that referred to life as a "breath" and our days as a "fleeting shadow." Sunday morning, I had planned to use these thoughts as inspiration for a blog post.
Before I had a chance to write my thoughts, I received the shocking news that my 46-year-old nephew had committed suicide.
I pushed all thoughts of writing aside and went to be with my mom who was devastated by the news.
My heart ached for his parents who were going through the loss of a child for the second time.
They had lost their daughter to cancer a scant five years earlier.
We had a discussion, my brother and I, about the long, slow process of dying versus sudden death.
With one, you have time to say your goodbyes and with the other, you just hope and pray that you parted on good terms.
One slowly breaks your heart, and the other is a shock to your heart.
Between PTSD and clinical depression, Jim was plagued with suicidal thoughts.
It was a constant worry for me, and it was many years before I realized it wasn't my fault.
It was hard to admit there wasn't really anything I could do to change it.
I encouraged him to see a psychologist and to take the medicines that helped him function.
My sister made an observation.
She said if someone dies from a heart attack, you don't blame them.
If someone has something wrong inside their brain--thoughts they can't shut off, psychological problems, chemical imbalances--then maybe their death is no more a choice than having a heart attack.
We don't often choose how we die; it chooses us.
When Jim died after ten years of dementia, I learned what the "long goodbye" meant.
Although, death was a given, it didn't mean it was well taken.
It didn't matter that I should have been ready when Jim died--I wasn't ready to let him go.
The emotion that surprised me most was anger.
When the breath was gone and his days passed like a fleeting shadow, I was furious that he had to spend the last ten years of his life fading away.
We all talk about closure, but I have to agree with my brother that closure doesn't exist.
That isn't quite the word because some deaths just leave a big empty spot that can't be refilled.
We just keep moving and hope the pain of loss will fade to a manageable level.
Lately, when I walk out the door, I kiss my husband goodbye--every time.
"All the time you hear about people being in a car wreck without saying goodbye," I told him.
I call it my "insurance." More than insurance, it's a reminder that life can be snatched away in a heartbeat.
We need to make those calls, write those notes, visit our loved ones, forgive, go on vacation, have fun, and make the most of each day.
We should be thankful for the time we have to love, dream, and live.
Life is precious.
Each sunrise we have another chance, another day, to right a wrong, lend a helping hand, or to make a difference in some small way.
A breath.
A fleeting shadow.
That's all any of us have.
Copyright (c) March 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 13, 2017>
"My mom has dementia," the woman said.
"How is that different from Alzheimer's?" "I think of dementia as an umbrella," I said.
"Beneath the umbrella of dementia are several diseases.
Alzheimer's is the most common kind of dementia."  In the 2017 Alzheimer's Disease Facts and Figures, the Alzheimer's Association lists several diseases that cause dementia and associated characteristics.
They are Alzheimer's, vascular dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, mixed dementia (more than one cause--the most common is Alzheimer's and vascular dementia), frontotemporal dementia, Parkinson's disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (rare, can be genetic or caused by consuming products from cattle with mad cow disease), and normal pressure hydrocephalus.
The Alzheimer's Association does not list the rare disease Jim had.
His diagnosis was early onset Alzheimer's disease, but his autopsy revealed the disease he actually had was corticobasal ganglionic degeneration, a disease I had never heard of.
The report also mentions "incidental Lewy body," severe frontotemporal atrophy, tau positive glial inclusions in the white matter, but no evidence of Alzheimer's disease.
It is easy to understand with overlapping symptoms why diagnosis is so difficult.
While searching for an answer to the "why" of Jim's dementia, we received several conflicting theories, including Parkinson's and Pick's disease, before physicians finally settled on Alzheimer's.
Of course, the mention of Lewy body in Jim's autopsy, incidental aside, had me researching Lewy Body Dementia (LBD).
This disease affects around a million people in the United States.
There is no single test to diagnose LBD, and in the early stages, it may be confused with Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, or a mental disorder.
Diagnosis is made through examination, laboratory tests, brain imaging, and testing memory and cognition.
Through my volunteer work with the Alzheimer's Association, I've met fellow advocates diagnosed with LBD.
I remember one man telling me that his hallucinations were disruptive and disturbing.
Unfortunately, people with hallucinations or other behavior problems may be treated with anti-psychotic drugs.
Haloperidol (Haldol(r)), olanzapine (Zyprexa(r)), and resperidone (Risperdal(r)) should be avoided because of dangerous side effects, including an increased risk of death.
Lewy bodies attack several different regions of the brain, which causes a variety of problems for the person with the disease.
Short-term memory, perception difficulties, processing information, and language issues can be confused with Alzheimer's.
Movement disorders are similar to Parkinson's with tremor and muscle stiffness.
The distinction between LBD and Parkinson's dementia is based on the timing of dementia.
In LBD, dementia will quickly follow parkinsonism within a year, but people can have Parkinson's and not develop dementia for many years.
People with LBD often have sleep disorders.
The vivid dreams associated with REM disorder may cause a variety of symptoms ranging from talking while sleeping to punching a bed partner.
A person with LBD may be tired all the time due to insomnia or restless leg syndrome.
They may sleep excessively during the daytime.
LBD is managed in much the same way as Alzheimer's disease.
In addition to physical, speech, and occupational therapy, the Alzheimer's drug Exelon(r) may be used.
Other drugs may be used to help with movement, sleep disorders, and behavioral problems.
The surgical procedure used to relieve the movement symptoms of Parkinson's is not used when a person has LBD because it may adversely affect cognition.
LBD causes a variety of behavior and mood changes running the gamut from depression and apathy to agitation, delusions, and paranoia.
Managing the health care of a loved one with LBD can be quite challenging for a care partner.
If you are caring for a person with LBD, it is important to enlist help from family and friends.
Taking care of yourself and taking breaks will make you a better caregiver.
Do not neglect your own health!
When dealing with a progressive, degenerative disease, it is crucial that you find moments of joy.
Continue to enjoy activities with your loved one as much as you can for as long as you can.
Convert challenges into opportunities to use your creativity to live life to the fullest.
Copyright (c) March 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com For an informative publication about Lewy Body Dementia:  https://www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/publication/lewy-body-dementia/introduction
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 5, 2017>
With Donna Hirner-Gardner at Legislative Conference March marched onto my calendar with the purpose of seeing how sane I could remain in an insane world.
The month began with a series of meetings.
By Friday I was a little bedraggled and had driven to Jefferson City for the Business Women of Missouri legislative conference.
I arrived a little early and hiked from the parking garage to the capitol building to drop off an Alzheimer's packet.
Oops, I should have known everyone would leave early on a Friday, so that didn't happen.
I hiked back to my car and drove to the hotel by a circuitous route since I was coming in from another direction.
After I checked in and carried all my various bags to my room, I decided to relax with a cup of hot tea.
I made the tea and opened one of those little packets with a napkin, creamer, sweetener and stir stick to get some sugar for the tea.
The cup fell and the hot tea splattered all over me, but most of the tea spilled onto the floor.
I looked at the little napkin.
That was not going to work.
I dialed "O" and asked if they had anything I could use to clean up the tea.
"Just use a towel," he said, "and we'll send you up a clean one." Relaxation?
Who needs that?
I spent my relaxing time cleaning up the mess.
By the time I finished, it was time for my committee meeting.
Here it is the fifth of March and I've finally had a moment to sit down and fill out my wall calendar for the month.
Everything is on my phone, so my husband thinks this is an exercise in futility, but I like to be able to glance at the calendar and see what's ahead instead of waiting for a "ding" that tells me I need to be somewhere else at the same exact time I hear it.
With the two-day legislative conference behind me, I filled out the remainder of the month.
All I have to say is it is madness indeed.
I have exactly four days in the entire month that doesn't have one or more events or appointments.
Madness!
Or at least, what was I thinking?
I have several Alzheimer's events lined up.
Monday is my Alzheimer's district meeting with Congresswoman Hartzler's staff.
Tuesday is the Alzheimer's walk kick-off.
I have two Alzheimer's conference calls this week: Ambassador and combined work group.
Later in the month is a day for corporate sponsors, but the biggie is at the end of the month when I'll be going to the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum in D.C. To see all the activities on the calendar is a reminder that when I do have free time I need to be editing, organizing my electronic files, paying bills, catching up on my to-do list, fulfilling promises...and all the other things that don't make the calendar or the to-do list.
A lot of the events on my mad, mad, mad calendar are fun, and the ones that are business are spent with people whose company I enjoy.
Often, I spend as much time laughing as working.
With March comes the promise of springtime--flowers, birds, bees, plants, greener grass.
Oh, yes, grass.
Mowing?
I'll think about that when the time comes.
Oh, come on.
I know I'll have time to read a book, pet the dog, and maybe take a nap from time to time.
I'm going to guard those four free-and-clear days as if they were made of solid gold, because, actually, they are!
March may be madness, but April will be here before I know it.
I just peeked at April's calendar, and optimism aside, April is a popular conference month...
Copyright (c) March 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 28, 2017>
As usual, I was running late for an appointment this morning.
As I turned onto the highway, I noticed my Sedalia Democrat had been delivered to my paper box.
Deciding I could be on time if I didn't waste the couple of minutes to pick up the paper, I left it.
After my appointment, I made my usual stop at Walmart.
As I pushed my cart into the parking lot, I had to battle the wind to keep the cart going forward instead of sideways.
Talk about a strong wind.
The wind buffeted my car on the way home, and I parked at the end of the driveway to get my paper and mail.
The paper was gone.
I looked around and found it lying in the ditch.
After I retrieved the paper, I grabbed a stack of mail out of the mailbox.
The wind ripped a few pieces out of my hands and whimsically scattered them into the aforementioned ditch.
Have you ever chased paper that a gust of wind takes out of your reach time after time?
The Bob Dylan song "Blowin' in the Wind" came to mind.
Bits and pieces of the lyrics teased my memory.
I remembered unanswered questions about manhood, white doves, cannon balls, mountains washing to the sea, and pretending not to notice freedom lost.
The most haunting line in Dylan's song is about too many people dying.
Every year 700,000 people die from Alzheimer's, and so far we haven't been able to do one thing to stop it.
Not one single thing!
Alzheimer's disease is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States.
Approximately 5.4 million people are living, and dying, with the disease.
Around 200,000 people younger than age 65 have Alzheimer's.
Many are much, much younger.
Each year I join other advocates nationally to advocate for more research funds.
In our packets, we have information that compares research funds for Alzheimer's to the amount allocated to fight other diseases.
This dedication to fighting diseases has paid big dividends.
At one time, a diagnosis of HIV/AIDS was a death sentence.
Research has played a huge role in finding effective treatments for cancer and heart disease.
Lately, two promising drug therapies failed during drug trials.
When these treatments failed, we were disappointed, but we haven't given up!
Some of the brightest minds are working diligently to cure this incurable disease.
In the meantime, it is important that caregivers and persons with dementia have the care and support they need to live life to the fullest.
Those on the front lines need respite, home and community based support, family support, and a reason to hope.
They need to know that we have their backs.
I was at the Missouri State Capitol on Memory Day advocating for respite funds.
The Missouri state budget has been slashed, including a big reduction in the $450,000 service grants that our friends, neighbors, and families rely on for respite.
This is a case of saving pennies and costing dollars.
Respite helps keep persons with Alzheimer's at home longer.
A simple formula shows a possible cost savings of $2 million for the state.
Here's how it works:  800 respite families X $157 average NH Medicaid cost per day X 30 days delay in NH placement X 60% of NH residents on Medicaid = $2 million savings in Medicaid NH costs.
I'm going to D.C. at the end of March to visit Senator McCaskill, Senator Blunt and Congresswoman Hartzler.
Although, I take the fight to Capitol Hill, each of us has the power to make a difference without leaving the comfort of home.
Call, write, or email your legislators, especially when legislation is pending or advocates are visiting.
Become a voice.
Answer the calls to action.
By keeping up-to-date on Alzheimer's legislation, you can learn how to be an effective advocate.
It may seem that the answer to a cure is blowing in the wind, but if we chase it hard enough, we will eventually find it.
Copyright (c) February 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 17, 2017>
At the end of January, my friend, and mentor, Penny Braun passed away.
Penny was my first contact with the Alzheimer's Association.
When Jim first developed dementia symptoms, I called the Mid-Missouri Chapter, located in Columbia.
The executive director, Penny, answered the phone.
"I don't know if I should be calling you because my husband has memory problems but has not been diagnosed with Alzheimer's," I said.
"You called the right place," Penny assured me.
"We have information that will help you, and you can call us anytime." And I did.
Penny brought her beloved German shepherd, Victoria, with her when she came to the 1998 Sedalia Memory Walk.
Penny wasn't in any of the photos because she took them, but Victoria posed with the small group that walked that day.
In 2001, Penny asked asked me to go to the Alzheimer's forum.
"We're going to ask for a billion dollars," she told me.
"Maureen Reagan set that goal when she was on the national Alzheimer's board." "I can do that," I said with much more confidence than I felt.
I had no concept of what a billion dollars looked like.
Of course, the research funding was only a small fraction of that billion dollar goal.
Penny and I shared a room on my first trip to Washington, D.C. We arrived late and when we tried to check in, the clerk clicked the keyboard on the computer, frowned and clicked some more.
"I don't have a reservation for you," he said, "and we're booked solid." "We do have a reservation," Penny said firmly, "I have the paperwork here." Penny dug in her purse for the reservation.
When she couldn't find it, she turned on  the charm.
"We're exhausted, and surely you can find one room we can have.
Please, check with your manager and see if you can find a room for this old lady."  When he left to check, she turned to me and said, "They always save one room in case the president or some important person needs a room.
Oh, here it is!" She jubilantly pulled out the reservation, gave it a glance, and stuffed it back into her purse.
"It begins tomorrow night," she said in a stage whisper.
About that time, the clerk returned all smiles, and handed us the keys to a beautiful suite.
Mission accomplished.
After Penny retired from the Alzheimer's Association to care for her husband, I saw her only occasionally.
She was at the Alzheimer's roast last spring.
She, of course, gave me a big hug and asked how I was doing.
"Have you read my book?" she asked.
When I admitted I hadn't, she pulled a copy out of her purse and handed it to me.
Alzheimer's Caregiving: A Voice of Experience.
Penny knew the heartbreak of Alzheimer's because her mother had the disease.
Her family connection compelled her to open the office in Columbia, first as a volunteer.
She later became the chapter's first executive director.
Penny's book has several examples of situations and solutions to problems that "might work." She was smart enough to know that the same solutions don't work for every person, nor do the same solutions always work for the same person.
I had to smile when I got to the "Three Right Answers." She wrote, "As the disease progresses, three answers to problems seem inevitably right.
The first two are music and ice cream." The final right answer is the smile.
"Use it warmly and often." Rest in peace, my friend.
You left a legacy of hugs, smiles, and a caring heart.
Copyright (c) February 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 13, 2017>
When February 14 rolls around, hearts and minds everywhere focus on love.
Some look forward to the day with unbridled anticipation, while others feel only trepidation.
During our lifetimes, most of us will experience both feelings depending on how life is going at that moment.
Love can be enduring, or elusive.
It can be the center of our dreams, or the crux of our nightmares.
Love can bring us to the mountaintop or plunge us into the deepest, darkest valley.
Valentine's Day celebrates all kinds of love.
According to the ancient Greeks, there are seven different types of love.
I'm not sure that all the emotions we humans call "love" can really be narrowed down to seven categories, but I suppose it's a start.
1.
Eros, or erotic love, represents the physical body.
This type of love has all the passion and desire to fuel a romance.
It is because of Eros love that Cupid wears a blindfold.
2.
Philia, or affectionate love, is the love we feel for our friends who have our backs through the bad times in our lives.
These trusted friends provide the chocolate cake when our romantic love hits rock bottom.
3.
Storge is familial love.
Storge is the type of love we feel for our parents and children.
It can also be the fondness we have toward childhood friends where the relationship is built on familiarity and acceptance.
4.
The playful love of ludus is found during the early stages of falling in love.
That's when just seeing the interest of our affections can set our hearts all aflutter.
Ludus can also describe the relationship of friends who enjoy hanging out with each other.
5.
Pragma is enduring or practical love.
This kind of love is found in married couples who have made the effort to maintain their relationship through compromise, patience, and tolerance.
It can also be found in couples who stay together for political, social, or other practical reasons.
6.
Philautia is self-love.
In this sense, it is a good thing!
In order to truly love someone else, it is necessary to first love yourself.
Philautia is unhealthy when a person places himself before others.
7.
Agape is the purest love.
It is selfless love free of expectations that accepts and forgives.
Agape is unconditional love.
We all understand that in a romantic relationship, we give our hearts, and we expect that love to be reciprocated.
Since Cupid is blindfolded, sometimes love is blind.
We focus only on the good qualities and overlook the irritating ones.
Whether we survive the good, bad, and ugly that makes up every human being on earth depends on how much effort we put into keeping the love alive.
When we look at the different kinds of love, it is easy to see that agape, or unconditional love, is the type of love that caregivers have for their loved ones with dementia.
When Jim developed dementia, my love for him became multidimensional and included both pragma and storge.
I often likened my love for Jim to that of a mother for her child.
More importantly, I don't believe that the love of a caregiver fits neatly into some Greek or psychologist's category.
Each of us is a unique individual with an individual capacity for love.
Not even a scientist can accurately measure the love one person has for another.
A lot of hearts given on Valentine's Day are not worth the paper they are printed on.
The real value of a Valentine's heart is determined by how we treat the ones we love the other 364 days of the year and throughout the years of a lifetime.
Resources: https://lonerwolf.com/different-types-of-love/ https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/hide-and-seek/201606/the-7-types-love Copyright (c) February 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 4, 2017>
It seems that people are getting bolder and nastier in their communications.
I'm not much of a hater, but when I thought about it, there were a few things at the top of my list.
I hate consecutive months with dates that fall on the same day of the week.
Let me explain.
My hairdresser called me at work one day wondering why I hadn't shown up for my appointment.
"I don't have it on my calendar," I said.
Flipped the calendar and sure enough there it was--same day of the week, same date, different month.
This calendar issue has caused me grief in the past and came close to causing me grief this week.
I've been planning to go to a conference Friday and Saturday.
It was on the wall calendar for February 3-4, but while setting up a conference call for next month, I saw the conference on my electronic calendar for March 3-4.
Holy moly, sure glad I didn't drive to Jefferson City an entire month early.
I hate the paint MO-Dot uses on the roads.
It doesn't take long for the lines to fade away and I don't have confidence that I'm inside my lane.
This is especially dicey driving through town in the rain with streetlights and car lights glaring off the pavement.
The older I get, the harder it is to see the lines.
I want glow in the dark paint on our highways like the Netherlands has.
Is that too much to ask?
I hate tax time.
It isn't even so much paying the taxes as it is gathering all the papers together, bringing everything up to date in Quicken, and then putting the info on TurboTax.
Everything is complicated, and it makes my head hurt.
I'd so much rather be doing something else.
Much, much rather, be doing just about anything else.
I hate junk mail and junk email.
Try as I might, I can't get rid of those two.
I unsubscribe, report as spam, block, grit my teeth, and swear.
Nothing helps.
Right up there with junk email is email that requires me to complete a task when I'd rather be relaxing.
It's easy to be sucked into a project that's taking much more of my time than is warranted.
I hate debilitating disease especially Alzheimer's.
And Cancer.
And heart disease.
And diabetes.
And anything that makes a person suffer.
I hate to watch someone dying.
I wish we could live long, healthy lives, and when it was our time, we'd leap on that chariot of fire and ascend into heaven in a blaze of glory.
I hate homelessness.
Every time I go to D.C. for the Alzheimer's forum, I see dozens of the 11,623 homeless people that live in that city.
No one should have to curl up on a park bench or huddle in a doorway on a cold winter's night.
One year, I was sitting in the lobby of a five-star D.C. hotel when this lady walked inside.
She was dressed in a long flowing dress, but I noticed she wasn't wearing a bra.
A hotel worker rushed out from behind the desk and confronted her.
"You have to leave or I'll call the police,"  he told her.
"Please don't call the police.
I don't have any place to stay and it's cold outside," she replied in a soft voice.
"There's a homeless shelter a couple of blocks from here," he said.
Then, he showed her the door on a cold winter's night, and she went on her way.
I hate that we are never going to have world peace.
It is impossible in a world where power means more than people, and religion means more than faith, and we focus on our differences rather than our commonalities.
I hate Cajun toast.
The identical twin look of Cajun and cinnamon seasonings caused me to serve my granddaughter Cajun toast when she was little.
To be sure, it had some sugar in it, but it was still nasty.
Earlier this week I went to sprinkle cinnamon sugar on my toast and I reached for the Rubbermaid mini container where I keep it.
Well, I also keep cinnamon creamer in an identical container, but caught myself.
I reached into the cabinet and pulled out another container thinking this was surely the right one.
The smell was a clue that my husband used one of the minis for something that smelled suspiciously like Cajun seasoning.
Finally, third time was a charm.
Yes, there are a few things I hate in this world, but many, many more that I love.
Copyright (c) February 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 31, 2017>
Yesterday I dove into the treasure trove of memories stored in the basement of the house that Jim built.
One large box had been water damaged from a drippy faucet, and I'd never had the heart to go through the hodgepodge inside that pitiful box until yesterday.
I tossed old Memory Walk memos, agendas, brochures, and various papers from the years I coordinated the Sedalia Walk.
I found two warped notebooks and sifted through the memories.
One had photos front and back in the notebook's protective cover sleeve.
The photo on the front was ruined, but when I flipped the book over, I saw a perfectly preserved photo from a "Night to Remember Dance." My eyes blurred as I looked at a photo of Ted Distler and me dancing.
Ted and I were friendly rivals.
He coordinated the Jefferson City walk, and we always tried to out-do each other.
The rivalry only spurred each of us to do our best.
I attended his chicken dinner and auction, and he supported our dance and auction.
It seemed there was always a gooseberry pie at both events and the winner was either him or me.
Those pies were never cheap!
Another role Ted and I shared was that of caregiver.
His lovely wife Norma was the center of his world and, is often the case, the disease took a terrible toll on both of them.
To say that Ted was my friend is an understatement.
He was more like family.
We would lose touch for a few months, but he'd call me or I would call him.
Then, one day I received a call from the Alzheimer's Association letting me know that Ted had passed away.
Norma soon joined him.
Next, I pulled out a box of thank you notes.
I opened the box and discovered a stack of photos.
The one on top was a smiling Jim wearing a "Colby's Grandpa" hat and holding our oldest grandson.
I leafed through the photos--Jim in Estes Park and at an early Memory Walk.
I carried items upstairs, and when I went back down, I saw a red crate filled with photos that never made it to the photo albums.
I opened an envelope and the first photo I saw was Jim playing his guitar.
Easter photos taken two decades ago brought an avalanche of memories.
I found memories scattered in places they shouldn't be.
Why had I thrown this batch of pictures in a crate instead of putting them away in photo boxes or albums?
My guess is that since most of these were taken around the time that life made a left turn, more pressing matters took priority.
This morning, I began the long organizational process by throwing away the extra envelopes and negatives.
Next, I will try to put the envelopes in chronological order.
I plan to throw away the out-of-focus photos and pictures of people I don't know, or care to know, including people on stage in Branson.
Finding the old photos felt like finding a hidden treasure.
I saw the innocent faces of children who are now adults with kids of their own.
I saw the smiles of beloved family members who are long gone and felt the warm breath of their spirits.
The real treasure trove, I realized, was the reminder that I've always been a link in a huge circle of love.
Copyright (c) January 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 29, 2017>
I had such a busy week that when Saturday rolled around, I plopped on the couch and turned on the TV.
I began to watch the twenty hours or so of the European Figure Skating championships recorded on the DVR.
This gluttonous devouring reiterated my opinion that a figure skating competition is the epitome of grace under fire.
Countries sent only their top skaters to the competition, but most knew they were not in medal contention.
Some found victory by participating in the competition, while others were only satisfied with one of the top three slots.
Some of the performances were so nearly perfect that a small bobble made the difference between earning a coveted medal, or going home empty handed.
It was easy to show grace when everything went according to plan, but those that truly showed their spirit were the ones who fell, jumped back up, and continued doing their very best.
The expert commentators knew immediately when someone faltered.
The skater's foot touched too soon, they didn't quite complete a rotation, or pairs were not in unison.
Skaters made "silly mistakes" when they completed difficult jumps and then stumbled on an easy element.
It made me think about being a caregiver.
I could often handle the messy and difficult parts of caregiving, but might fall apart over a broken nail.
Why was that?
I believe that I forced myself to meet the tough challenges with acceptance and a sense of loving duty.
Oh, but when it came to the simple setbacks, I stumbled.
I can't think of many things that rival the beauty of figure skating.
Each move is choreographed to carefully selected music.
Music helps set the tone whether figure skating or drudging through a day that seems almost too much to tolerate.
During the years of caregiving, I remember days when I was up before daylight to work ten hours and then went by the nursing home in the evening to feed and bathe Jim.
It was unusual for me to make it to bed before midnight.
In the journal I kept while Jim was in the nursing home, I would tell about my day and often say, "I am so tired." Thinking back, that's what I remember the most--being tired.
Exhausted.
Like I was running on empty.
Being chronically tired often means that grace goes by the wayside.
To this day, being tired makes me cranky and more than a bit whiney.
Caregiving, like figure skating, greatly improves with practice.
When we put ourselves out there, so to speak, we open ourselves up to criticism or derision.
Caregiving is like figure skating in that sense.
The critics will sit back and watch someone else struggle and pontify how it could have been done better or more efficiently.
When a caregiver provides caregiving with love and grace, it just doesn't get any better.
Taking care of a loved one is much like walking through fire.
It hurts like hell, but unless you keep on moving, you're going to be charred beyond recognition.
None of us makes it through life without faltering.
The best we can hope for is to demonstrate grace under fire.
No one gets a medal for being the best caregiver in the world.
Our reward comes from being the best caregiver we can be.
Copyright (c) January 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 16, 2017>
Yesterday, I watched the Kansas City Chiefs play the Steelers in a playoff game.
Any year the Chiefs made the playoffs, we fans were hopeful that the Chiefs would make it to the Superbowl.
We always hoped we wouldn't be disappointed--again.
During commercial breaks, I watched other fans' reactions online.
About the time I realized the Chiefs were going to fall to the curse of their playoff games, a photo of a youthful Jim popped up on my Facebook newsfeed.
Jim was the sole reason that I became a Chief's fan.
Through winning seasons and losing seasons, he was steadfast in his loyalty.
During the early years of our marriage, Monday night football was opposite the movie of the week.
With one TV set, I never watched a single movie during football season.
Although, it seemed magical that Jim's photo appeared on my phone just as I was thinking of him, I scrolled past other old family photos.
Jim's cousin Debbie had decided to make an online album of old family photos, and I assumed she had posted the photo.
I downloaded the photo and added it to my own online album of Jim's pictures.
"Can I steal this for the Fisher album?" she asked.
"I just stole it myself.
That's where I thought it was," I replied.
It didn't take me long to figure out that my nephew John had posted it.
Seeing Jim's photo put a lot of perspective in my outlook, and reminded me of the real urgency of now.
When he was diagnosed with dementia of the Alzheimer's type, my goal became to do anything possible to change the outcome.
The urgency to do something, rather than patiently wait for the inevitable, was part of my nature.
I trolled the internet looking for anything to stave off a degenerative, fatal disease.
I tried to get Jim enrolled in drug trials.
He was turned down for one trial because he was too young and for another because he had lost the ability to communicate.
I began to go to the Alzheimer's forum to advocate for more research dollars.
I saw the urgency to find a cure in the eyes of caregivers, and my heart hurt for them.
I felt their pain and knew the disappointment of hearing a doctor say, "Even if they find a cure, the disease is so far advanced that it's too late for him."    As the years went by and the disease won, I continued my advocacy, as have many others who lost loved ones.
We all share the same hopes and dreams--a cure for Alzheimer's.
I recently read the "I Have a Dream" speech Martin Luther King, Jr., delivered at the Lincoln Memorial in 1963.
Although his speech was loaded with quotable sentences, one phrase caught and held my attention.
King spoke of "the fierce urgency of now." Many of us won't step out of our comfort zone to fight for our cause with the conviction of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Most of us anonymously fight our fight.
Some of the rich and famous meet the challenge as they or their loved ones discover Alzheimer's when it strikes close to home.
Just this week, I learned that the former head coach of the Kansas City Chiefs Marty Schottenheimer has Alzheimer's.
This too, helps me put the Chief's loss into its proper perspective.
Next season, the Chief's have a new start and a chance to redeem themselves.
As far as Alzheimer's, there are no second chances.
With more people dying each day that passes without a cure, we have the "fierce urgency of now" to end Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) January 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 8, 2017>
A few weeks ago, my grandson went to the closet where we keep our games and came out with a vintage Monopoly game.
I hadn't played the game since I was a kid and sure didn't remember anything about it or the rules.
My grandson gave "money" to Harold and me and the game began.
It turned out to be a game of choices and chance.
The roll of the dice could give you a chance to purchase properties, pay rent or taxes, draw a "chance" or "community chest" card, or maybe "go to jail." It didn't take long for me to find out what the expression, "do not pass go," meant.
My son, who was watching us play, noticed something rather peculiar.
"Mom, you are being so cautious about what you spend, and Harold is buying without a second thought.
That's totally the opposite of how you are in real life." I had to agree.
Spending habits aside, the game made me think about how each of us has a monopoly on our own destiny.
Have you ever stopped to think how much your life would be affected if you had made one major choice differently than you did?
Or what if that lucky break hadn't come your way?
Chance can put us in dangerous situations.
Decisions can lessen the danger or increase it.
How often have you heard someone say, "If that had happened to me, I would have... (blah, blah, blah)." One thing I've learned in life, no person will ever know what he would do in someone else's situation.
I don't have a clue why they react the way they do, because I have not lived the same life.
In my own life, I met Jim by chance, chose to marry him, and chose to work at it.
Dementia cut his life short by chance, and I chose to become an Alzheimer's volunteer, which brought about a major change in my life.
I've gone places I would have never gone, had experiences I would not have had, and found friends I would have never met.
Who we are and what we've become is a conglomeration of choice and chance.
Sometimes, we might not even distinguish the difference.
Have you ever noticed how many of us go to college and never work in the field we studied?
Sometimes, that's choice and sometimes it's chance.
Maybe we couldn't find that special job we wanted.
The winds of chance did not blow in our direction.
Sometimes, we just grow older and decide that wasn't the career path for us.
At one time, I wanted to be a teacher.
Then, I wanted to be a journalist.
What really happened was I became a mom and stayed home with the kids while they were little.
My first real job after returning to college was in subscriptions at a coonhound magazine.
Believe me, I never saw that coming!
After that company moved out of town, I, by chance, was selected to interview for a job on a computer.
You have to realize that I had never seen a computer, much less used one.
I chose to believe that it was something I always wanted to experience.
That choice changed our family's economic situation.
Up until then, we had spent several years living frugally and still barely getting by.
Nine years after Jim passed away, I chose to remarry.
So, here I am, in this house, in this room, at this table, working on this PC because of a lifetime of choices and by chance.
It's a scary thought that my destiny would have changed if I had made one different decision along the way.
Yes, I have a monopoly on my life.
No one else will ever have the exact experiences or make the same decisions I have made.
On the other hand, I've always had a feeling that the choices and chances I took were meant to be.
I seriously doubt that I've always made the wisest or even the most logical choice.
My decisions have been good, bad, and ugly, and yet somehow, in the end, it worked out.
I believe I've often been "nudged" along the right path.
My path.
Copyright (c) January 2017 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 30, 2016>
Each January, we greet the New Year with optimism that we will experience a whole lot of "happy." Somewhere in the recesses of our brain, we seem to think putting up a new calendar magically starts everything anew.
How we felt about 2016 may depend on how we look at life in general.
If we accept the ebb and flow as a natural part of the tides of life, we probably didn't see a lot of difference from any other year.
Some of us, in any given year, have major life events that will forever distinguish certain years no matter how much time passes.
Other than those special years--graduation, marriage, births, deaths, etc.--the years of my life just blurred together.
In retrospect, I couldn't even tell you which years were good years and which were bad unless some exceptional event set it apart from others.
Jim was the most amazing person I ever knew when it came to dates and years.
I believe his ability to remember his past so distinctly was because of his phenomenal memory coupled with living in so many different places throughout his lifetime.
I had hoped that 2016 would be the year when a breakthrough in Alzheimer's would make this a red-letter year.
Although, we've had successes, we are still short of the prize.
This year saw a historic increase in Alzheimer's research funding, and that increase holds a prayer and a promise that we may be on the cusp of the ultimate discovery.
Personally, this year held failures and successes.
I lost an election, won a prize, finished some projects, and plodded along with others with no end in sight.
I've been blessed with generally good health, with only a few minor setbacks.
I've made several new friends and lost a few.
On the positive side, I learned how to line dance this year.
I helped with my brother's memoir, and I'm so proud of him and my sister-in-law for bringing his story to life.
I've made many, many happy memories and found several dashes of humor in the world around me.
I believe, I'll give 2016 two thumbs up.
Oh, is this when I should be thinking about resolutions for 2017?
Will we ever learn that the all or nothing nature of resolutions sets us up for failure?
I recently read that a paltry 8% of people are successful when it comes to resolutions.
I've long been a fan of goals rather than resolutions.
Healthy Living recommends "resets" instead of resolutions.
The point is that instead of attacking resolutions like gangbusters (my term, not theirs) on January 1, just to give up when you break it, reset each day.
So you didn't cut out all sugar on January 2 per your ambitious New Year's resolution, simply reset on January 3, and try again!
Jim and I used to call that "overs." When something didn't work out the first time, we allowed do-overs.
In 2017, I would like to wish you a multitude of resets and do-overs to help you achieve your goals and to follow your dreams!
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 25, 2016>
1975 I recently watched a Christmas movie where gifts from the song "The Twelve Days of Christmas" arrived at a home prior to Christmas, with the final gift and message arriving on Christmas Day.
While searching for the name of the movie, which turned out to be My Christmas Love, I came across two other Hallmark movies based on twelve gifts of Christmas.
The interesting thing I discovered during Christmas services this morning was that Christmas Day is the first day of Christmas, which means that I've always had the entire gift-giving thing backwards.
I guess I'm not alone since Hallmark has it wrong too.
I think we all assumed it was a countdown to Christmas in the same manner as advent.
So, on this first Day of Christmas, I can't help but remember the Christmases past.
In so many ways, the passage of time lies in our memories of white Christmases, balmy Christmases, blue Christmases, indifferent Christmases, bittersweet Christmases, beleaguered Christmases ...well, you catch my drift.
My memories of Christmas fit all of those.
I remember being worried as a kid that Santa couldn't come unless there was snow on the ground.
The Christmas when I was 18, I spent fifteen minutes of Christmas day with my new husband.
That was one of those blue Christmases as I headed home, and he headed back to Vietnam.
I remember many Christmases as a new mom, worrying whether "Santa" was going to be able to afford a decent Christmas for my kids.
It seemed we always managed, and we let the kids open their presents on Christmas Eve to leave Christmas day open for the big dinner.
Since we spent Thanksgiving with my family, we always spent Christmas day with Jim's family.
Virginia would cook a huge meal and everyone was invited.
We'd cram into her small house and on those "balmy" Christmas days, the overflow would go outside and eat Christmas dinner on the picnic table.
The day would be full of joy, hugs, laughter, and love.
After the kids were grown, we had our family get-together on Christmas Eve.
When my youngest son was on-call for his work, we just started having it on a Saturday before Christmas.
We've just been flexible about it.
Christmas Eve is my granddaughter's birthday, so by moving our family gathering, she can celebrate her special day at home.
For the decade of Jim's dementia, Christmas was bittersweet.
I saw each Christmas become more and more disconnected from the traditional Christmases of our past.
One year as I was clearing a shelf to decorate, I boxed up some of the framed photos that sat on the shelf the rest of the year.
Jim silently pulled the photos out of the box and set them back on the shelf.
After Jim went into the nursing home, I brought him home for Christmas the first and second years.
It went pretty well, but it was certainly different.
After that, I spent Christmas day with Jim at the nursing home.
After I came home later in the day, I usually missed most of the people who had come to Virginia's house for Christmas dinner.
Since Jim's death, my Christmases have been a hodgepodge, but most would not be considered "traditional." Still, in a way, they are somewhat traditional for me.
All the hectic celebrations are out of the way by Christmas day.
It has truly become a holiday from obligations for me.
And that isn't all bad.
I love to light up the trees and enjoy the peace and quiet.
It's a great time to reflect on the good times and to count my blessings.
Since the twelve days of Christmas do not end until January 5, I suppose I should leave up my Christmas decorations until then.
Whew, that takes off some pressure.
I usually plan to take them down the first day of January, but now I have a reprieve.
After all, we should celebrate all twelve days of Christmas, don't you think?
I will also count myself as one who does not judge the people who leave their outdoor lights glowing until January 5.
After that, seriously, shouldn't you shut them off?
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 20, 2016>
I've watched several Hallmark Christmas movies lately and if there's one thing that can be said for them--they are predictable.
Even Harold who isn't a fan had watched a few minutes of a show a few nights ago.
"Well," he predicted, "she isn't going to end up with the guy she's dating at the beginning of the show--it's going to be that guy she just met." "I can usually tell within the first few minutes who will be a couple at the end.
These shows almost always end with a kiss, and a happily-ever-after." Predictable.
When I went to bed that night, I opened a Nicholas Sparks' book.
I told Harold, "You know, this book is predictable too.
One of the main characters always dies in his books." And, by the time I finished the book, sure enough.
Death happened.
Predictable.
I haven't figured out why I'm watching Hallmark movies or reading Nicholas Sparks when I'm a big, big fan of unpredictable stories with an unexpected twist at the end.
Maybe these little happy movies and tearjerker books just let my mind go on autopilot rather than think about the unpredictability of life itself.
Sometimes we reach a point in our lives that we think yesterday was predictable, today was predictable, and tomorrow will be predictable.
It's about that stage in our lives when the unpredictable can throw us into a tailspin.
Complacency never lasts forever, and a split-second can change your life forever.
The only predictable thing about life is that it is unpredictable.
Nobody, but nobody, makes it through this world unscathed.
What really matters is how we handle adversity.
In the first place, Hallmark movies aside, no one outside of a fairy tale, lives happily ever after.
A kiss, or getting married, isn't the end of a story; it is the beginning.
When you utter the words, "for better or worse" and "in sickness or in health" you are uttering them for a reason.
The greatest test of traditional wedding vows is whether your love is strong enough to withstand the unpredictable--hard financial times, disease, heartbreak, accidents, death of a dear friend or family member, or even affluence at the expense of family time.
On December 20, 1969, I exchanged these promises with Jim.
We didn't have any idea what the future held for us.
We were young and in love, so we took a chance.
Life is unpredictable, but whatever it threw at us, we were in it together.
I believe the most unpredictable thing was that my level-headed, intelligent husband would develop dementia at forty-nine.
Not only unpredictable, it was unimaginable, which is saying a lot for a person with my imagination.
Still, I wouldn't have wanted to know on that day in 1969 that it would end the way it did.
I've always been the kind of person who would never give up on life or happiness no matter what.
I hope that never changes as long as I breathe.
Recently, I visited the cemetery to put a poinsettia in front of the columbarium wall beneath Jim's marker.
As I touched his name, a sharp wind blew causing my eyes to water.
Well, at least I blamed the wind.
When I climbed back into my car, I wiped the tears, and drove away to continue driving the unpredictable road of life.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, December 15, 2016>
Lately, I've been posting some short passages to Early Onset Alzheimer's blog from Indelible, a memoir in progress.
Several people have asked me when I will finish the memoir, and the short answer is "I don't know." I believe I can have it finished by this time next year, but there are no guarantees.
I began putting the memoir together in 2008, but the source documents date back many years.
I began documenting Jim's health from the time I first noticed something was terribly wrong.
This document was extremely useful when we began the physician circuit looking for answers.
Did you notice that you have to fill out forms for every doctor you see?
It was much easier to answer the questions when I knew the answers.
"Wow!" One nurse said when I handed her Jim's health questionnaire.
"I don't know that much about my own medical history." "I don't know that much about mine either," I admitted.
In addition to capturing emails where I kept friends and family updated on what was going on with Jim, I transcribed a collection of audio tapes.
I kept the recorder in my car and as I left the nursing home, I talked about how things were going at the home, with Jim, and often the humorous antics of the residents.
I started each tape with the date: "It's October 15, 2004, and I'm on my way home..." By the time I heard my voice saying the date, I would know whether it had been a good day or a bad day.
Often I'd say, "I'm just so tired." It seemed like I never had enough hours in the day and that I sacrificed sleep to get everything done.
When I pulled all this information together, I had an unwieldy documentary of our dementia journey.
Every time I sat down to work with the raw material, I became overwhelmed.
The enormous task of weeding through the minutia to uncover the story was part of the problem, but the biggest problem was dealing with the emotional blow of re-living the most heartbreaking years of my life.
In January 2008, I decided to begin a blog dedicated to early onset Alzheimer's.
My first blog post, "The Indelible Mark" was an epiphany brought on by a dream.
What does an indelible marker have to do with dementia?
When someone we love has Alzheimer's or a related dementia, we often think they are fading away as their memories and skills are erased.
We grieve for the past and dread the future.
Yet, we are blessed with living in the present and find moments of joy radiating in the midst of an ordinary day.
When Jim developed dementia at forty-nine, we knew life would never be the same.
Our memories eventually became my memories.
The disease stole Jim from me, but it could not steal the indelible mark he left behind.
Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love are indelible images of Jim.
In one picture, he smiles from beneath his favorite Stetson.
In the other, he walks away from the camera on a beach in Oregon.
I can't imagine his indelible memory living in a happier place.
This short blog post was the beginning of telling Jim's story in a manageable way.
Helping edit my brother's memoir Sanctity inspired me to go back to work on our story.
So I pulled up the rough draft and began working my way through it.
I am in a better place to work on the manuscript now.
Enough time has passed that I can handle the emotional baggage--most of the time.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 12, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress):  "I brought balloons for our anniversary," I said, and he smiled.
One had a yellow smiley face with kisses on it, and the other said "Happy Anniversary."  "Today is our thirty-fifth anniversary," I said.
"We sure were young then." He looked at me like he didn't have a clue what I was talking about, but he liked the balloons.
I put the balloons close to the fiber optic tree I bought him earlier in December.
Jim leaned back in his recliner and turned his head to watch the tree.
He looked at the tree, the balloons, and then at me as if he wanted to say something.
He moved his mouth like he was going to talk, but no sound came out.
I sang some Christmas songs to him and he seemed to understand what I was singing.
"I'm trying to get him to say Rudolph," I told the aides when they came in his room.
"If you get him to say 'Rudolph' we will bow down to you," one of them said.
The aides left and two of the residents came in with the name cards from their dinner trays.
They handed the cards to me and one of them said, "Will you take our tickets so that we can get a room tonight?" "You already have a room," I said.
"No, we don't have rooms, but we have tickets," she said, "We just need to figure out who to give the ticket to." I handed them back their "tickets" and they wandered away in search of someone who would give them a room for the night.
An elderly gentleman walked down the hallway, stopped in the doorway, and said, "Hello ma'am.
How are you?
Merry Christmas!" "Merry Christmas!" I said.
"All I want for Christmas is a Cadillac," he said.
"I guess we could all wish for that for Christmas," I said.
"Good night, Ma'am!" He turned around and headed back the way he came from.
I didn't recognize him and had been trying to decide if he was a visitor or a new resident.
He was dressed a little oddly, but seemed with it intellectually.
I thought that maybe he was a resident by the way he stopped, turned around, and went back.
I began to feed Jim, and he ate pretty well, but he choked when I was about finished.
I stayed for a while longer to make sure he was okay.
I put his recliner in a more upright position and moved the balloons and card to his tray.
Jim was looking at the balloons.
I was surprised they had held his attention that long.
At least he was looking at his surroundings.
Sometimes he wouldn't look at anything.
I kissed him goodbye.
The lump in my throat made the words come out in a whisper, "I love you sweetheart.
Happy anniversary."  Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 11, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (Memoir in Progress):  I gave Jim a bath before I fed him.
When I took him back to his recliner, he fell asleep, tilted, and fell.
He finally started taking steps even though he didn't seem to wake up.
He finally woke up when I put him into his recliner.
I had planned to take down his Christmas tree, but the box was still in the car where I had forgotten it.
The rain pelted against Jim's windows, and I dreaded going back outside.
As I spooned his food, I talked to him.
"Well, I'm not going back out in that crap to get the box for the Christmas tree." Jim's eyes moved toward the tree.
"I guess you'll get to enjoy it one more day." Since Jim had been in the home, the only thing that kept me off the roads was snow drifted so deep I couldn't drive on the gravel roads.
The roads drifted depending on which way the wind blew.
If the roads running east and west weren't drifted, then the roads running north and south would be.
I could remember a time when I wouldn't dream of driving on wintry roads, but then, I didn't have to drive when the weather was bad.
Jim used to drive me to work when the roads were slick.
It seemed that the worse the roads, the more he wanted to drive on them.
He called it "busting the drifts." Driving a four-wheel drive wouldn't have been half the fun of traversing treacherous roads in our old two-wheel drive cars, pickups, or vans.
We had been stuck in many snowdrifts.
One morning, several years ago, Jim and I headed off to work in our baby-blue Ford van.
Jim  navigated the drifted snow like nothing was wrong.
We drove past his brother's house, and we could barely see the tracks Billy had made on his way to work.
Snow was still falling and high drifts had formed on the section of Sinkhole Road that headed north.
We slid and plowed through the snow until we came to a standstill in a drift.
"Guess, we'll just have to go back," Jim said.
"When we get home, I'll call and tell them I'm drifted in," I said.
Jim threw the van in reverse, but it wouldn't budge.
There we sat in the middle of the road, giant flakes of snow falling in the predawn hour.
"We might as well walk back to Billy's," Jim said.
"Okay," I said, grabbing up my purse and lunch.
I tried to force open the van door, but it was pushing snow.
I slammed the door.
"I'm not going out in that!
The snow is up to my knees, the wind is blowing, and it's like a blizzard out there." "Well," Jim said, picking up the thermos and pouring two steaming cups of coffee, "We'll just wait here.
No one can get past us without helping us out." Smiling at the memories of being stuck in snowdrifts with Jim, I pulled a blanket over him and reclined him in his chair.
Jim turned his big blue eyes toward me, and for an instant, I was looking into the eyes of the man Jim used to be when he was my lover and my best friend.
"Goodnight, sweetie," I said, kissing him on his nose.
His eyes glazed over, and he seemed to be looking through me.
Robotically, he turned toward the TV, and its dancing lights and music grabbed his attention.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 10, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): Another Christmas.
I put up a tree while I was alone in the house and didn't cry.
The nursing home halls were ornately decorated for the holidays.
"Jim stopped his merry walker in front of Santa," the charge nurse said pointing at a wall hanging of the jolly old elf.
"Then, he stopped and said, 'Hello, Santa.'" She held up her hand as if to swear it was the truth.
"Wish I'd seen that!" I said.
Jim spoke so rarely.
Among the Christmas decorations, was a flag made with cutouts of children's hands.
It had been hanging on the wall since a few weeks after the September 11 tragedy.
A few days after the Santa incident, I noticed Jim stopping in front of the flag and tipping his cap.
I thought maybe he was just adjusting it, but a few days later, he stopped in front of the flag and saluted it.
There was some discussion among the family as to whether I should bring Jim home for the traditional Christmas Eve gathering.
My thoughts were that Christmas was for our family, and Jim was still part of that family.
I brought Jim home and helped him out of the van and down the walkway.
He took his usual seat on the reclining section of the couch.
Rob and Colby were playing video games on the TV.
Before long, he yelled, "Hey!" and jumped up and started going toward them.
"I wonder if he wants to play," I said.
At one time, Jim loved video games, and he played Mario Karts long after he was in the nursing home.
Rob ejected the game they were playing, and inserted Mario Karts into the Play Station.
"Here, Dad," he said as he handed Jim a control.
Jim didn't seem to remember how to use it, so Rob passed the other control to Colby and helped his dad maneuver the one he held.
After a few races, Jim remembered how to run the car around the track, but the master of the game was not competitive.
Colby, in true Fisher fashion, bragged about winning.
"I beat grandpa!" As young as he was, Colby knew his grandpa's reputation for being a formidable opponent.
We ate dinner and Jim did pretty well.
He didn't try to leave the house; he just paced up and down the halls.
We opened presents and, of course, Jim was not interested in that.
After the gift exchange, I took him back to the home.
Jim didn't notice the cheerful Christmas lights on the houses we passed.
He did pretty well until we got about halfway back.
He yelled and tried to get out of his seatbelt.
I may have bundled him up too much trying to keep him from getting cold, and instead he was entirely too hot.
We never knew that due to circumstances, and Jim's declining health, this would be his last Christmas at home.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 9, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): In 1999, my mom and my nephew Jason went with us.
Jim was a Michael Martin Murphy fan and owned every audio tape Murphy had released.
As we drove down I-70 through the wheat fields and sunflowers of Kansas, Jim insisted on listening to these tapes.
As Jim napped in the back seat, my mom looked at me and said, "You know I always liked Michael Martin Murphy." "Me too," I said.
"But...after listening to him for hours and hours, I don't care if I never hear him again." "Me either," I said.
Jim was becoming more eccentric.
He wore sunglasses day and night and walked with a cane.
He tore paper towels in half, then folded them tightly.
He stuffed them in his shirt and jacket pockets making the pockets bulge and giving his chest a misshapen look.
His denim jacket was covered with decorative pins.
He wore a tattered Branson Veteran's nametag that was removed only when I washed the jacket.
Jim insisted on eating cottage cheese and pineapple with every meal, including breakfast.
We fixed most meals in the cabin, so he could have the food he wanted.
The cabin was a new environment, and Jim couldn't figure out how to work the water in the shower, so I helped him.
Then, I helped him dress.
One morning while I took a shower, Jim walked out the door and down the road.
"Jim's gone out the door," mom told me.
I shut off the water, "See if Jason can catch him." By the time I got out of the shower and dressed, Jason and Jim came through the door.
"I didn't know what to do, so I told him you needed to talk to him," Jason said.
"When I told him that, he turned around and came back." We spent our evenings on the river walk drinking large cups of flavored coffee from the MacGregor Bookstore.
Jim's favorite entertainment in Estes Park was the Lazy-B Ranch Boys' dinner show.
Jim was enthusiastic and happy.
In his hesitant speech he talked to one of the performers before the show.
The man invited Jim to come behind the counter and play his guitar.
Jim eagerly picked up the guitar and played a few cowboy songs.
He sang the song I'm Tellin' You Friend, I Ain't Had a Good Day.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, December 8, 2016>
While decorating this morning, I put a country music Christmas CD in the player.
Merle Haggard's song "If We Make it through December" brought about a heart-weary nostalgic feeling.
In many ways, that song was the story of our lives in the early, struggling years when our kids were little.
Instead of being the joyful time of "Jingle Bells," December was the most stressful time of the year.
The cold, winter weather became an endurance test.
We lived in drafty old houses that were hard to heat and slept under cold-weather rated sleeping bags to stay warm.
That is, when we could sleep.
I remember Jim getting up all hours of the night to start the car so that it would start the next morning.
Of course, it was futile if the roads were drifted shut.
Just to add to the anxiety, there was always the problem of coughing up enough money to fill the propane tank.
One year, right before Christmas, we filled our tank just to have it all leak out during a snowstorm.
The truck came back and only because the driver was determined, he managed to get close enough to the tank to re-fill it.
Too often jolly, ho-ho-ho people don't realize how hard the holidays are for those who have lost a loved one.
Christmas doesn't seem the same when someone you've always celebrated with is no longer there.
When a white Christmas turns into a blue Christmas, it isn't easy to exorcise that pesky inner Grinch and infuse oneself with the joy of the season.
A decade of Christmases were changed because of Jim's dementia.
The first few years were a blessing in that being a grandpa gave him a new joy in Christmas.
Later, I ate Christmas dinner with him at the nursing home.
The meal would be a mixture of nursing home prepared and care packages from his mom.
We are all individuals with countless memories of Christmas.
Memories could be of a time of separation, grief, heartache, loneliness, and the bitter cold of winter.
Other memories could be the elation of happy reunions, the perfect gift--given or received, the look on a grandchild's face, hugs, a heart overflowing with love, and a landscape of glittery, fluffy snow.
My memories of Christmas are as packed and varied as Santa's bag.
Opening memories are much like unwrapping gifts at random.
Which gift shall I open next?
Will it be the booby prize?
Will it be a heart-leaping memory of joy?
Happy?
Sad?
Although the song this morning brought back some bittersweet times of December, I choose to focus more on the precious memories I have of Christmas past.
As I put up my village this morning, I was reminded of the time when my grandson Colby was just a little kid and helped me with the village.
I put the cotton batting "snow" on a small table.
"You take the houses out of the boxes and I'll set them on the table," I said.
Colby went to work.
He opened the boxes, peeled off the protective tissue, tossed the boxes and tissue in the floor, and handed me the houses.
When we finished, we admired the village.
Then Colby looked around and said, "We sure did make a big mess, Grandma Linda." I had to laugh and agree.
"We sure did!" Christmas wouldn't have been Christmas without a huge dinner prepared by my mother-in-law.
The house would be overflowing with family and the air fragrant with turkey, ham, homemade light rolls, and pies.
The table would groan beneath the weight of the food.
The house and yard would be overflowing with family.
Remembering those special times, makes it easy to feel the jolliness of Christmas.
Now, Christmas is a quiet time at our house.
We will have our get-together with the kids and grandkids this Sunday.
I plan on going to candlelight services on Christmas Eve.
I believe some quiet reflection on the real reason for Christmas may be an excellent way to put it all in perspective.
It seems like a good way to blend all memories into a greater meaning of life, love, and the reason for the season.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 7, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress):  On our Colorado trip in 1997, we rented a room at Trapper's Inn.
The rustic inn was situated at the edge of Estes Park.
Elk wandered across the yard and through the parking lot.
We spent our days driving into the National Forest animal watching and picnicking.
One morning Jim prepared to make coffee in the in-room coffeemaker.
He picked up the pot, set it down, picked it up, and set it down.
He looked around in confusion trying to decide what to do next.
From the bed, I said, "Put coffee in the basket."   "Oh!
That's right." He put the coffee in and then acted like he expected the coffee to make itself.
"Put water in the pot." He put water in the pot.
"Pour it in the top" He poured it in.
"Turn the pot on" He turned it on.
As soon as the coffee was done, he was back in full form.
He poured the coffee into the thermos, cleaned the pot, and brought me a cup of coffee in bed.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 6, 2016>
For the next few days, I'm going to post some stories from our Colorado trips.
We went to Colorado every year on vacation and camped at Moraine Park in the Rocky Mountain National Park.
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): In retrospect, I could measure the progression of Jim's dementia by our annual camping trips to Colorado.
In 1995, putting up the tent was a fiasco.
"This is the way it goes together," Jim said, picking up a pole from the pile of different length rods.
We tried slipping the rods into the canvas only to find our final creation was not a tent.
"Okay, now are you ready for me to dig out the instructions?" I asked with as much patience as I could muster.
"I guess so," he said grudgingly.
Between the two of us, we managed to slide out the rods.
Even with directions, it was hard to figure out what went where.
"That's not right," Jim insisted.
"Humor me." I huffed and puffed in the thin mountain air as I struggled with the poles.
After a lot of stress, strain, and cuss words, our home away from home looked like it was supposed to.
"Let's get the equipment out of the van," I said.
Finally, camp was set up to our liking, and we could relax in our lawn chairs.
Jim was the official camp cook, and I really didn't know how the stove worked.
I watched him and offered help when he couldn't quite get things right.
That year, I helped a lot with meal preparation.
Overall, the problems weren't too bad and it didn't discourage us.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 5, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): It was hard to watch a man who had once fixed our old van with a screwdriver and a piece of wire struggle to complete a simple task.
"Honey, put this light bulb in for me," I said.
Both of us were short, but he still had a height advantage.
The light bulb over the wash machine was just out of my reach, and my step stool was upstairs.
Jim reached up and removed the burnt out bulb, but then struggled in his efforts to replace it.
He turned the bulb to the right a few times, then to the left as if he were working a combination lock.
"Turn it to the right," I said.
As soon as the words left my lips, I knew it was a worthless piece of information for someone who no longer knew left from right.
"Turn it like this," I said, pantomiming the correct motion.
Jim stood there holding the bulb like the Statue of Liberty held her torch.
His eyes turned toward me, but they didn't seem to focus.
I could imagine myself as he saw me, a blurred image making noises that make no more sense than the incessant chirping of magpies.
I reached out my hand, "Okay, honey, give me the bulb and I'll put it in." Jim passed the bulb to me and paused to touch the top of the washer.
He wandered off aimlessly, shuffling to the stairs.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 4, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): The silence was overpowering, the room too quiet.
I reached out to feel the reassuring lump of my sleeping husband, but his side of the bed was empty.
I bounded out of bed, running through the house, flipping on lights, yelling Jim's name.
Fear sliced through my body with a burning wave of fire when I realized he was missing.
Knowing I couldn't waste any time, I jumped in the car and drove east, the direction he usually traveled, peering at the area penetrated by the high beams of my headlights.
Although I had a sense of urgency, I drove cautiously because I didn't want to hit Jim with the car.
I had no idea how long he'd been gone, and the farther I traveled without seeing him, the more I panicked.
I reached the crossroads and without hesitation, turned left, choosing Jim's normal route.
My mouth was getting dry.
I pressed onward, fear and worry jockeying for position in my mind.
I rounded the next corner, headlights slicing through the darkness.
There he was!
The tension drained from my body, replaced with elation and relief.
Jim was fully dressed wearing jacket, jeans, and his "Vietnam Veteran and Proud of It" cap.
He seemed to be unaware of the car and continued his measured tortoise pace, cane grasped in his left hand.
I pulled over and stopped behind him, climbed out of the car, speed walking to catch up with him.
I reached out and wrapped my fingers around his bicep, and he stopped as if he had applied his brakes.
"Honey, you scared me," I said.
"Come on, let's go home, and have some coffee."   He turned his face toward me.
His eyes were hidden behind sunglasses, but his mouth and facial features were expressionless giving him a surreal appearance.
I hooked my hand at his elbow and guided him toward the car.
I opened the passenger door; he climbed in, resting his cane on the floor.
He settled into the seat and fastened his seat belt.
I drove to the highway, turned around, and took him home.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 3, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): Jim plucked his guitar off its stand and settled in a chair facing my mom.
He strummed a cowboy song about having a bad day and sang a few lines.
It seemed to be about the only song he remembered.
"Hey, Jim, can you play Buckaroo?" Mom coaxed.
He strummed the cowboy tune again.
"I'd sure like to hear Buckaroo," Mom said.
Jim gave her a blank look.
Mom nodded and smiled encouragement.
"Buckaroo?" Jim's eyes lit up, and he lowered his head as his fingers found the melody.
The strains of "Buckaroo," played flawlessly filled the kitchen.
As soon as he finished, Mom and I applauded.
It was so good to hear his "signature" tune.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 2, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): Jim pounded on the van, jerking the door handle, and yelling unintelligible words.
The screen door slammed behind me as I rushed outside, fumbling with my keyless entry button to unlock the door.
Jim yanked the door and sagged as the door flew open.
"Honey, what are you doing?" I was concerned we would be kicked out of our rental cabin for disturbing the quiet neighborhood.
"Won't open," he said.
"I know.
I locked the doors while I carried in luggage."    Tears streamed down Jim's cheeks, and he glared at me.
Our family doctor had written a new prescription to help level out Jim's moodiness.
I had hoped the erratic behavior would end, and I wouldn't have to give him the new medicine.
Reluctantly, I handed Jim a bottle of water and one of the new pills.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, December 1, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): We went on a tour bus to Kemper Arena to see the Stars on Ice show.
Jim and I both enjoyed ice skating and this was our fourth trip to see the best ice skaters in the world perform.
Our bus let us off at a convenient spot and our tour guide showed us to our seats.
Jim wore his black hooded Kansas City Chiefs coat, with the hood up and buttoned tight under his chin.
He had on his super-dark sunglasses and his gloves.
"Honey, don't you think you should take off your coat?" I hinted.
"No!
It's cold in here!" Soon, Jim reached into his pocket and pulled out his hand-held poker game.
He played the game, although he had no idea when to draw cards or hold them.
I thought that at least, it would keep him occupied until the show started.
The lights dimmed and colorful spotlights blazed on the skaters in flashy costumes, music blasted, and the show began with much fanfare.
As the skaters swooshed onto the ice, we were close enough to see the goose bumps on their flesh.
Jim calmly continued playing his game, completely ignoring Scott Hamilton's enormous jumps, antics, and back flips.
He even ignored his favorite skater of all time, Katerina Witt.
Jim never once took his eyes off his poker game during the first part of the show, only letting me know when he had to go to the bathroom.
Copyright (c) December 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 30, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): During the early stages of the disease, Jim was the telemarketer's best friend.
It seemed that he always agreed to anything they suggested.
It wasn't unusual to come home after work and have Jim say.
"Someone called about that thing." "What thing?" "You know, that we want." "Who called?" "I have no idea." After a few of those conversations, I installed caller ID.
I often had to call to cancel TV programs, donations to various charities, tickets to events we couldn't attend, and occasionally say no to people we knew who really should have known not to make agreements with Jim.
Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 29, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): I went with Jim to see our family doctor about his memory problems.
"Tell me what kind of problems you're having," the doctor said.
"I go to the garage and can't remember why I've gone there," Jim said.
The doctor smiled at him and said, "At least you remember that you're forgetting.
That's a good sign."  Jim was having trouble remembering where he put a lot of things.
Sometimes he was looking for items that weren't even kept in the garage.
It wasn't long before Jim's language skills began to slip away.
"Right here, but I can't find it!" he would say to me in a frustrated tone.
"What are you looking for?" I would ask.
"Right here!" If I was lucky, he'd point at his bare feet, and I'd know he was looking for his shoes, or his head and I'd know it was his cap.
Too often, he'd just wave his arms, and I would help him look although I had no idea what object he was trying to find.
Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 28, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress): Jim began to have difficulty writing.
He would write letters but they wouldn't make up words.
Most of the time, the combination was close enough that I knew what he meant.
I wanted him to feel useful and to "exercise his brain." One morning, I was washing the breakfast dishes and Jim was sitting at the table.
"Honey, would you make a grocery list for me?" I nodded toward the pad and pen I'd placed on the table.
"We need paper towels," I said.
He picked up the pen and wrote on the notepad.
"We need milk," I said.
He set the pen down and said, "I don't want to." He walked out of the room, and I sat down to finish the list.
On the paper, he had printed, "taper powels."  Later he picked up the list and studied it carefully.
"I wonder why I spelled 'paper towels' that way," he said.
Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 27, 2016>
Early Onset Alzheimer's Blog I went to see J.K. Rowling's Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them movie with my grandkids and daughter-in-law.
I'll admit that my granddaughter had to keep whispering information to me since I'm not a big reader of fantasy and (gasp!)
have not read a single Harry Potter novel, much less the prequel story of Newt Scamander.
She might as well have been speaking a foreign language although I often nodded and tried to absorb the information.
I am definitely a No-Maj.  No, I don't need to give a spoiler alert here.
During the course of the movie, buildings were destroyed and then magically repaired.
That's why it's called fantasy, folks, because we all know that when something is destroyed it takes a lot of work and tenacity to rebuild it.
Sometimes, I have thought of Alzheimer's as a beast.
Just like in the movie, the beast burrows beneath the surface, but in this case, wreaks havoc in the brain.
The Alzheimer's beast is made up of two halves--beta-amyloid  plaques and tau tangles.
The Alzheimer's beast builds a roadblock between brain cells making it hard for them to communicate with each other.
The beast murders brain nerve cells, which causes tissue loss.
The thinking-planning-remembering part of the brain, the cortex, begins to wither.
The hippocampus where we develop new memories is especially hard hit by Alzheimer's and shrinks dramatically.
The fluid filled spaces in the brain, the ventricles, become larger as the rest of the brain shrinks.
Unlike the movie, the damage caused by the Alzheimer's beast cannot be repaired by waving a magic wand.
I believe that someday--sooner, than later, I sincerely hope--researchers will find a means to stop Alzheimer's in its insidious tracks.
Research involves a lot of trial and failure.
I received disappointing news from the Alzheimer's Association last week.
Eli Lilly's experimental drug, solanezumab, had earlier shown promise in slowing the deterioration of thinking and memory, but failed in a large clinical trial.
Better news comes out of the University of Kansas Alzheimer's Disease Center.
The National Institute on Aging, part of the National Institutes of Health, renewed the center's national designation for five years.
This center in the heart of America will receive $9.0 million through 2021 to continue their search to understand Alzheimer's and treat the disease.
Douglas Girod, executive vice chancellor of  KU Medical Center said, "When the NIA first announced in August 2011 that the KU Alzheimer's Disease Center (KU ADC) had achieved national designation, we were thrilled, but not surprised.
We knew that our Alzheimer's program had long been at the forefront of discovery and had already achieved significant success in understanding and treating this devastating disease." The center will be studying lifestyle changes as well as drug intervention in changing the course of the disease.
Jeffery Burns, MD, co-director of the center announced that several clinical trials are examining the heart/brain connection: what's good for the heart is good for the brain.
KU ADC plans to expand the Lifetime Enrichment for Lifestyle Prevention (LEAP) program as a way to promote brain health in residents of senior living facilities.
Okay, how can you help?
One of the roadblocks to these programs is a lack of volunteers.
The biggest need right now is for healthy volunteers who are Hispanic or African American, but they need clinical volunteers of all types.
Alzheimer's may seem like a beast that can't be beaten, but when we promote Alzheimer's research and make finding a cure a national priority, we can drive the beast from our midst.
I've already admitted I'm not a fan of fantasy, but this No-Maj is a fan of fact.
It is a fact that lifestyle can reduce our risk of Alzheimer's, and that researchers are working hard to find a prevention, treatment, or cure.
When researchers unlock the mystery of Alzheimer's disease, it will be magical in its own way.
Resource: http://www.kumc.edu/news-listing-page/the-ku-alzheimer%E2%80%99s-disease-center-renews-national-designation-expands-research-and-partnerships.html Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 26, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress):   Jim became part of a study for a Phase III drug.
He was tested during each follow up visit with the neurologist.
They let me stay with him during the testing.
"What season is it," the nurse asked.
"I have no idea," Jim replied.
"Did you wear a coat today?" she asked as a cue.
"Yes." "What season do you think it is if you are wearing a coat?" "I have no idea." "Do you know where you are?" "A hospital." "Do you know what city this is?" "Yes." He couldn't come up with a name, but was confident he knew where he was.
"Do you know where the stamp goes on this envelope?" She handed him an envelope.
"Right here," he said pointing to the upper right hand corner.
He gave me a look, like he thought she might be just a bit stupid to not know where the stamp went.
Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 24, 2016>
Alzheimer's: Know the Signs  #3--Difficulty completing familiar tasks Memory lapses did not convince me that Jim had dementia, but when he began to have problems doing things he had always done, I knew something was terribly wrong.
Jim had played a guitar from the time he was a child.
One morning, he asked me to tune his guitar.
Jim, the guy with the musical expertise of a lifetime and perfect pitch, asked tone-deaf me to tune his guitar.
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress):  Jim used to pick up his guitar and record audio and video tapes for his relatives in Oregon.
When he finished a tape, he would write their name on it and set it aside.
One day, his mom saw Jim put something in our mailbox which was in front of her house next door.
After he put the object in the box, he raised the flag.
Curious to see what Jim was mailing, she opened the mailbox after he went home.
It was an audio tape.
Just a tape, not in an envelope or addressed.
He wanted to send it to his cousin Leroy, so he put it in the mailbox.
Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 23, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress):  Jim was huddled on the end of the couch, hands on his arms.
"Brrr, it's hot in here!" he complained.
Jim was on blood thinners and chilled easily.
He remembered the thermostat controlled the temperature, but he couldn't remember how it worked.
I had finally placed a piece of duct tape over the thermostat to keep him from pushing it from one extreme to the other.
"Let's see what we can do about that," I said.
One quick glance confirmed he had forced the thermostat past my duct tape barrier and changed the setting to 60 degrees.
I adjusted the thermostat to warm the house and placed another layer of duct tape on it.
Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 22, 2016>
Excerpt from "Indelible" (memoir in progress):   I parked the car, opened the trunk, and began unloading the sacks from Walmart.
I couldn't convince Jim to help carry the bags.
Sometimes he would, but this wasn't one of those times.
Jim wandered to the front door and waited for me to unlock it.
I grabbed the handles of a half dozen plastic sacks, carried them to the porch, and after struggling with the key, unlocked the door.
Jim walked into the house, and I tossed the first load inside the door.
I trekked back to the garage for the rest of the sacks, but when I brought them inside, the other bags had gone missing.
After I figured out Jim had carried the groceries to the bedroom, I lugged them back to the kitchen.
Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 20, 2016>
Jim and I sat in side-by-side chairs in an examining room.
We were both scared.
I knew I looked as worried, or more so, than Jim did.
The neurologist breezed into the room, and said to Jim, "Now, we know why you are having trouble with thinking.
Your MRI shows brain atrophy." My tears began to flow.
"Why so sad?" he asked.
"Other people have similar problems and go on with their lives." "Do you have your legal affairs in order?" he asked.
"No," I admitted, thinking that question had an ominous sound to it.
Ominous or not, we heeded his advice and visited our attorney.
He prepared our wills, advance directives, and durable power of attorney for financial and medical.
We had it covered for both of us.
That was before online banking and bill pay--at least as far as we were concerned.
I couldn't get too involved online with super slow dial-up Internet and a PC that barely qualified as a working machine.
Now, with high-speed Internet and a powerful PC, most of my financial dealings are online.
I pay bills electronically, access online bank accounts, and have countless other web presences.
Not all assets are monetary.
Some of us store our precious family photos online in digital photo albums.
Still, I figured my designated power-of-attorney could handle my digital affairs if I became incapacitated.
That was a misconception indeed!
Harold and I have always assumed that if need be, we could manage each other's digital finances, including the accounts each of us hold separately.
In a casual conversation, he discovered that it was illegal to access an account unless you are a joint owner.
Even a financial durable power of attorney does not give legal access to digital accounts.
A Florida woman found that out the hard way.
Her husband had dementia, and she had managed his online bank account for years.
One day she had a problem with the password, and when she contacted the bank, they told her she could not access the account because her name was not on it.
Sometimes it seems that we live in a world of too many laws, but digital information is one area that hasn't been covered in most states.
Persons with dementia need someone to manage their digital assets.
Congress and state legislatures could enact laws to ensure powers of attorney allow access to online assets and that executors can administer and distribute online assets.
Service providers may eventually ask for "standby" owners who would manage digital accounts when an owner dies, or as in the case of dementia, could not manage his own account.
A law has been drafted addressing digital assets.
At its 2015 Annual Conference in Williamsburg, Virginia, the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws approved and recommended for enactment in all states a Revised Uniform Fiduciary Access to Digital Assets Act (2015).
The act would grant the legal authority to manage digital assets to four types of fiduciaries: personal representatives of decedents' estates, conservators for protected persons, agents acting pursuant to a power of attorney, and trustees.
In addition, the proposed Act would give custodians of the assets the legal authority to conduct business with the fiduciary of their client.
In other words, the bank in Florida could have legally helped the woman access her incapacitated husband's account.
Most of us need to revisit our financial documentation to make sure our digital affairs are in order.
I don't know about you, but it gives me nightmares to think that any of my digital assets could be forever lost in cyberspace.
Resources: http://www.uniformlaws.org/shared/docs/Fiduciary%20Access%20to%20Digital%20Assets/2015_RUFADAA_Final%20Act_2016mar8.pdf  http://www.americanbar.org/publications/probate_property_magazine_2012/2012/january_february_2012/article_beyer_cahn_planning_for_digital_assets.html  Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 15, 2016>
There had been quite a bit of hype over the "supermoon" of November 13 and 14--the brightest moon in 68 years.
This was going to be a full moon on steroids.
A photographer's dream.
Well, even though I had it on my calendar, I crawled into bed and settled down with my book.
My phone buzzed, and I looked at it.
Reminder: Supermoon.
I jumped out of bed and wandered out onto the deck to take a few shots of the moon.
Yes, it was bright and silvery.
I took some photos, made a few camera adjustments, took some more and went back to bed.
The next morning started early for me.
As I walked past my bedroom window, I saw a bright moon shining in the west.
Before I'd had my first cup of coffee, I put on my boots and wandered out into the field to take photos of the moon.
The sun was rising in the east and the play of light on the russet fall leaves made a different kind of moon photo than I'd taken at the midnight hour.
Whew.
Supermoon over, I could go back to regular sunset photos.
That night, I had line dancing class.
I pulled out of the garage and saw a bright orange-yellow moon peeping over the horizon.
I ran back inside to grab my camera.
I braced my arms on the car door and took a few shots.
Well, supermoon was supposed to be over, so that's just a bad moon arising, I thought to myself.
I knew the full moon had been the previous night, but the difference was subtle.
I couldn't help but think about the changes in Jim's behavior during the full moon.
I know, I know, some people believe that's just an old wives' tale.
In this case, I'd have to count myself as an old wife, because I saw it firsthand.
Most scientists believe the moon only affects open liquid, like the ocean, and not enclosed liquid such as in the human brain.
But, you know if you dig deep enough, you can prove just about anything with Google and, lo and behold, I found a scientific study on the moon's effect on a person with Alzheimer's.
Alan M. Beck (sorry, no letters after his name), Purdue University, conducted a longitudinal study of the moon's effect on persons with Alzheimer's.
His sought to "objectively examine the lunar influence on the frequency, duration, and intensity of behaviors in individuals with Alzheimer's disease."  The behaviors he studied were wandering, anxiety, physical aggression, and verbal confrontation.
His conclusion--wait for it--aligned with mine.
The study showed that people with Alzheimer's disease not only exhibited more behaviors during the full moon--they exhibited significantly more.
I'm certain that was not new information for nursing home workers.
After my impromptu photo shoot, I headed to the Celebration Center for my line dancing class, the moon was in full view most of the time.
I kept thinking about "Bad Moon Rising" by Credence Clearwater Revival.
I hadn't heard that song in years.
It always made me think of that scene in the Twilight Zone movie where the passenger in the car asks the driver, "You want to see something really scary?" Yep.
Full moons, or almost full moons, can be bad moons.
I pushed all thoughts of bad moons to the back of my mind and turned on the happy feet for line dancing.
After about fifty minutes, we formed a circle to do a dance called "around the world." Our leader, Ruth, ran us through the steps so that we went in the right direction at the right time and didn't knock each other down.
She cued up the music and the sounds of "Bad Moon Rising" filled the room.
As we danced around the full-moon shaped circle, we laughed at how fast we were moving.
Was it a coincidence that we danced to that song for the first time on the night I saw a bad moon arising?
Of course, it was!
Wasn't it?
Just to be safe, I'm not going out anymore tonight.
source: http://www.alzheimers.net/2013-11-15/does-the-full-moon-affect-alzheimers-patients/ Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 13, 2016>
Jessica Snell, Vicky Hartzler, WyAnn Lipps, Linda Fisher When Jim was first diagnosed with an Alzheimer's type of dementia, I began a quest to learn as much as possible about the disease.
I attended walks, forums, symposiums, and training sessions.
I read books about Alzheimer's and inspirational books trying my best to stay positive.
Becoming a volunteer and advocate helped me believe, that in some small way, I was helping in the fight against Alzheimer's.
I was excited when Adam Timmerman from Congresswoman Hartzler's office called me to discuss early plans for an Alzheimer's forum in Sedalia.
We had not had an Alzheimer's program in our hometown for several years.
Adam's planning resulted in an outstanding program.
The first speaker of the day was Joel Shenker, MD PhD, a neurologist and cognitive psychologist.
Adam couldn't have found a more knowledgeable or dynamic speaker.
Dr. Joel Shenker Dr. Shenker gave an overview of the disease along with prevalence and the personal and financial cost.
He explained biomarkers, discussed research, and explained the different kinds of brain scans.
The truly outstanding element of Dr. Shenker's presentation was how he shared information in a way that made it easy to understand.
The cornerstone of his message was "We need a culture shift." He said that we do not handle dementia well.
Most people with dementia are undiagnosed and not treated.
This means that a bus driver, a pilot, or a person in a leadership position could have undiagnosed Alzheimer's disease.
Research shows that most people with Alzheimer's do want to know.
Dr. Shenker said, "People can overprotect you, which robs you of your independence." Think about those words and let them really sink in.
In the early stages, input from the person with the disease can help them chart their own course.
I knew from personal experience that this was important information for the caregivers in the room.
When Jim's test results showed he had brain atrophy, his neurologist told us to get our affairs in order.
Talk about scary words to people in their forties.
He asked Jim, "Who do you want making decisions for you when you aren't able to make them?
Strangers, or your wife?" "I want her to make them," Jim said.
I shared some of my experiences as a caregiver with a "Caregiver Emotions" presentation.
Emotions at the top of a caregiver's list are guilt, resentment, anger, worry, loneliness, defensiveness, and grief.
These emotions can be harmful to the health of the caregiver, so it is important to know strategies to take control of them.
The program ended with two panels.
The first panel included a support group facilitator, a geriatric physician, a nurse with care planning experience, and a social worker.
They each gave brief descriptions of what they did and answered numerous questions from the audience.
The second panel was made up of the Sedalia Walk to End Alzheimer's chairs, Jessica Snell and WyAnn Lipps, and an Alzheimer's advocate (me).
Jessica and WyAnn talked about the Walk, the committee, and the need for community involvement.
I talked about how anyone can be an advocate and stressed that we work with all political parties.
Alzheimer's is a bipartisan problem and requires a bipartisan solution.
The forum was a great success!
On behalf of the participants, I would like to extend our great appreciation to Adam Timmerman and Congresswoman Hartzler for making this an event to remember.
Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 8, 2016>
Coming into Sedalia, the southbound lane of Highway 65 splits, one lane toward downtown, and the other lane continues through town.
I was on my way to line dancing exercise class and used the right-hand lane to go to the Celebration Center.
I was thinking about how early darkness had fallen, when the car in front of me swerved to the right.
Immediately, I was gazing into the shadow of death in the form of headlights coming my way.
In my thousands of trips through this area, I had never once met a car going the wrong way.
I swerved to the right, and the car passed by on the left.
In my rearview mirror, I saw the car turn around and head back in the correct direction rather than continue north in the southbound lane.
There has been more than one fatal accident locally with cars going the wrong way.
I know of at least two that involved elderly persons with dementia.
In one case, the family knew the man shouldn't have been driving, but taking the keys away wasn't easy.
The person with dementia may balk at relinquishing them and family may be reluctant to take away a final piece of independence.
One of the phrases Jim used when dementia interfered with his speech was, "You're going the wrong way." He told me that all the time, but it wasn't because I was physically going the wrong way.
He was trying to tell me something was wrong, usually because I didn't understand what he was trying to tell me.
In my opinion kindness, decency, and a positive attitude are going the wrong way.
We have been bombarded with conspiracy theories, rumors, and character assassinations.
I received a political advertisement in the mail that completely attacked the character of a man running for state office.
The odd thing was that his opponent was not mentioned at all.
We've been inundated with negativity for so long, that it is having a detrimental impact on our quality of life.
People are nervous, intimidated, and angry.
I hate to think of the effect on long-term health, both physical and mental.
Perhaps the worst fallout from this exposure to negativity is alienation of family and friends.
No one likes to be lumped into a group that has this, that, or another quality.
Each of us has a different thought process and different deal breakers.
Just because someone thinks differently doesn't mean you are one hundred percent correct and they are one hundred percent wrong.
I've been wrong more than once.
Luckily, I was wrong recently.
I sent a photo to an email address I copied from another source.
An email came back.
"I think you have the wrong person."  I looked at the address and thought it was correct so I said the photo was attached taken at a recent meeting.
"I don't remember going to that meeting.
When was it?
My memory sometimes gets the best of me." My heart sank.
Oh, no, forgetting a meeting that occurred less than a week ago was not a good sign.
I swallowed hard and read the email to my husband.
"That doesn't make sense," he said.
"She was fine that night." I had to agree with him.
She was articulate, involved, and as spunky as ever.
As I sat there mulling over the situation, I noticed that I had left out a dot.
I apologized to the person I had sent the photo to in error, and explained my mistake.
I received a reply, "That 'dot' will get you every time!" I definitely sent it the wrong way...to the wrong person.
Or was it the right person?
I have no idea who the unintended recipient was, but I appreciated his or her sense of humor.
It was a lesson learned as far as I was concerned.
Maybe I've been looking at this entire political process the wrong way.
I will admit I've have had a little fun when people share articles without reading them because of a misleading headline.
The article may say exactly the opposite of what they presume it said, but they blow their stack over another perceived "outrage." Humor can ease a lot of angst.
Don't all of us need that now?
Copyright (c) November 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 31, 2016>
Throughout my lifetime, I can remember different Halloween adventures.
As we walked from home to home, we'd stop to pick up pears that had fallen to the ground.
Word on the street would spread as to which homes had the popcorn balls or the best homemade cookies.
Yes.
Homemade.
In our town, you never heard of anyone tampering with candy.
Halloween was fun and kids could count on being treated, and never cruelly tricked.
The only trick for me was the upset stomach on All Saints Day from indulging in too many sweets the prior night.
Have you ever noticed that in life we know people who are tricked by life and others who are treated?
Whether life brings rewards (treats) or disaster (tricks) doesn't seem to have any correlation as to how deserving they are.
Good people get the biggest tricks of all--cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's.
Bad people get big inheritances, win the lottery, and raise high in life by stepping on others.
I'm not saying that all people who make it good in life are bad.
Badness comes from the core, not the outward trappings.
Bad people trick good people because they have no conscience.
They not only manipulate, they also revel in their power to sway gullible people.
They bully and project their own shortcomings onto others.
Life doesn't have a balance sheet.
Good deeds for others doesn't always produce dividends or reciprocation.
Just as when someone cons you and takes advantage of you, don't expect karma to bite them in the butt.
Conniving a way to "get even" brings you down.
Instead of revenge being sweet as Halloween candy, it's more like biting into a razor blade hidden in an apple.
Personally, I've been both tricked and treated numerous times throughout my life.
That's the way it is for everyone.
Maybe that's where the balance is.
Sometimes tricks turn into treats.
I lost a job at a time when I couldn't afford to lose the income.
I found a much, much better one.
When I was young, I had my heart broken.
Then, I found my soul mate.
The thing about life is that when it hits rock bottom, it can't possibly go any lower.
Life is a cycle of good, bad, good, bad, good.
Unless the rollercoaster flies off the rails, just hang on and enjoy the ride.
The choice is mine.
Do I want to be one of the tricked or one of the treated?
I choose to be treated.
Copyright (c) October 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 30, 2016>
I blog about early onset Alzheimer's, and authors often ask me to read their books.
If I believe I can squeeze in the time to read another book, I'll ask for an electronic copy.
A few months ago, I had the privilege of reading a prepublication copy of Brought to Our Senses by Kathleen Wheeler, release date November 1.
I don't want to gush, but this is one of the best Alzheimer's novels I've read...and I've read a lot of them.
Brought to Our Senses explores the family dynamics when early onset Alzheimer's strikes the Kraus family's mother.
A dysfunctional family must reshape their differences to deal with the unthinkable.
The distinct characters and the storyline make this a page-turner.
This spellbinding story is so real to life that it is easy to forget it is a novel and not a true story.
I liken the quality of this book to that of Still Alice.
If you only have time to read one Alzheimer's novel this year, I would recommend this one.
Kathleen has kindly provided some background for me to share with my blog followers:    Tell a Great Story: First and foremost, I wanted to tell a compelling story, one that just sucks you in from the get go.
I've been drawn to reading and writing since I was a kid and have always wanted to write a novel.
Once I grasped the premise for my book and realized what a great story it was, I just couldn't let it go.
I had to write it.
Build Awareness: I had other reasons for sharing the story too.
Alzheimer's was extremely traumatic for my family, and I've been changed by the experience.
I wanted to share the reality of the illness, and I wanted to emphasize the importance of strong family relationships to get through such an ordeal.
Give Back: Finally, I wanted to do something positive for the community, something that would help others struggling with the difficulties of dementia.
So I'm donating a portion of proceeds from the sale of my book to help organizations that support dementia patients, family caregivers, and research to find a cure.
Upcoming events: Here are a couple of those groups with events already lined up for my book's release.
If you're in central Illinois, stop by or attend to see me and help with the efforts of these fine organizations: SIU School of Medicine Center for Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Alzheimer's Awareness Educational Program Free and open to public, register before or at the door as space permits  November 5, 2016 (Saturday) from 9 am - 12 noon Memorial Center for Innovation and Learning M.G.
Nelson Family Auditorium 228 West Miller St, Springfield, IL Alzheimer's Association - Greater Illinois Chapter Book Signing Benefit November 15, 2016 (Tuesday) from 4:30 - 6:30 pm County Market Mezzanine 210 E Carpenter St, Springfield, IL 62702 For up-to-date information, visit Kathleen's author website:  http://www.authorkathleenhwheeler.com/share/ Copyright (c) October 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 22, 2016>
At line dancing exercise class last week, our fearless leader, Ruth, said that line dancing was her way to relieve stress and take her mind off her troubles.
"That's what it does for me too!" I said.
"No matter how bad a day I might have, I leave here in good spirits." Part of the reason is that while I exercise, I have to concentrate on the steps.
By focusing on the dance, I empty my mind of all the troubling thoughts that may have been plaguing me.
This month was our annual "take me away" Girl's Trip for my mom, my sisters, and me.
Our short vacation was a relaxing kind of busy.
Still, it must have tired me out, since I spent the entire first day back in my PJ's doing absolutely nothing beyond eating and breathing.
I haven't figured out how to live without a certain amount of stress, but retirement alleviated a lot of it.
Now, I seldom have a headache, while it used to be an almost daily event.
Even so, I have too many things to do and not enough hours in the day to accomplish them.
Here it is, almost Halloween, and I've yet to put up my fall decorations.
I planned on doing that three weeks ago, but it just hasn't happened.
I used my decorations at the October SBW meeting, and until Wednesday, I still had them in the trunk of my car.
Now, at least, I've brought them inside, and they are currently on the dining room table.
I have been a wee bit busy lately.
I thought after the craziness of September that October would be a little more laid-back.
Instead, my calendar is stacked, double stacked, and occasionally triple-stacked.
This last week has been Business Women's Week with daily activities.
Fortunately, some of the events were simply stress-busters too.
One night was "relaxation night" and I participated in a Zumba class.
Another night, we played Bunco with a lot of laughter and visiting.
Dinners and luncheons were an opportunity to spend time with my friends.
Yesterday was the second day this month that I didn't have something on my calendar.
That doesn't mean I didn't do anything.
I caught up on some of my accounting, updated a website, and helped with plans for the Alzheimer's Symposium that Congresswoman Hartzler is hosting in Sedalia on November 10.
I will present a program on "Caregiver Emotions" at the symposium.
I've given this program three times before--once at the Senior Center in Warsaw, for the Men's Support Group in Columbia, and for family members who had loved ones in a nursing home.
By addressing the individual emotions, a caregiver can alleviate caregiver stress.
Managing stress is a crucial step toward staying healthy.
Left unchecked, stress can leave you vulnerable to high blood pressure, acid reflux, blurred vision, irritability, and problems with concentration.
Caregivers tend to ignore their own health problems, which can lead to the caregiver dying before his loved one.
The last few months of ugly political rhetoric has created stress for a lot of us.
Social media has turned into a firestorm of disagreement, meanness, name-calling, and wild stories re-tweeted and shared as if they were the gospel.
I can only hope and pray that after the election, people will rebuild the bridges they've burned with their family and loved ones.
Now is the time for all of us to look for those "take me away" moments.
I find it totally relaxing to sit on the deck drinking coffee and conversing with the dog.
Reading a good book is another way of getting away from the day-to-day stress that creeps up on me.
Hallmark movies, the Voice, and reruns of the Golden Girls saw me through many stressful moments.
Laughter is the best stress buster, and I've found that the old truism "Laughter is the best medicine" is undeniably true!
Copyright (c) October 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 7, 2016>
We are always asking kids what they want to be when they grow up.
I remember when my youngest son was young, he used to say, "Curtis and I want to go to Colorado and be mountain men." One time my granddaughter told me that she wanted to be "Barbie" when she grew up.
I was watching a TV show several weeks ago and grown-ups were saying what they wanted to be when they "grew up." One person said, "When I grow up, I want to give more than I get." Well, I never wanted to be Barbie or a mountain man, but I certainly admire the idea of giving more than I get.
It's only natural for us to look out for numero uno.
After all, we're looking at the world through one set of eyes and from one perspective.
With our limited vision of the world around us some find it easier to be selfish than to be selfless.
Does it do any good to measure what others own to what we have?
Coveting another's possessions creates a miserable existence.
Those who have little might envy those who have more, or those who have a lot might look down on people who have less.
Some people are innately generous, for example a child who gives his or her favorite toy to a friend.
More common are the children who grab a coveted toy out of another child's hands.
The odd thing is that often people who are the most sharing are those who have the least.
Maybe it isn't so strange after all.
People who have accumulated a lot of wealth sometimes do so by pinching each penny until it screams.
They've worked hard for what they have, and they don't think anyone else deserves the fruit of their labor.
Wealth can be a prison of fear and anxiety.
I came from a home with two hard-working parents who struggled to provide for a family with eight children.
We never had a lot, but Mom and Dad instilled into each of us that a person's worth was not tied to how many material possessions he had amassed.
Instead of telling us to go out into the world and try to be rich, our parents guided us toward being independent, hard-working adults who took satisfaction in being good people.
We were taught that we weren't better than the less fortunate, and we weren't less than the wealthy.
We were raised in a share and share alike environment, and it has lasted each of us for a lifetime.
There is not a selfish member in my family!
One of the most generous people I've known in my lifetime was Jim.
He would not only give someone the shirt off his back, he actually gave my brother the buttons off his uniform.
He gave away a priceless tater bug mandolin and a valuable Gibson guitar.
I would say throughout his life, he gave much more than he received.
Greed wasn't in his vocabulary.
Although dementia greedily snatched him away physically, he left an indelible impact on the lives he touched.
Throughout his life, a circle of family and friends surrounded him with love.
Jim was one of the people who gave more than he got during his lifetime.
No, he didn't leave a monetary inheritance.
What he left was a richness of memories, stories, and love of family.
That is admirable in itself, but I think even more important is that when he passed away, he left more than he took.
Copyright (c) October 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 29, 2016>
Last week I got into the poison ivy again.
Now, I have it for the second time in my life.
The first time was about this time last year during the fall yard cleanup.
My husband, self confessed as never having had the itchy breaking out, told me I'd get over it if I'd quit scratching.
He read up on the internet about several remedies.
I tried cortisone cream, cortisone cooling gel, aloe gel, etc, etc.
Anyway, before I broke out the baking soda/vinegar paste, in desperation I called my doctor's office.
The rash had stayed a week and I wanted it to be gone.
"Any questions about the prescriptions?" the girl at the counter politely asked.
"No," I answered as I swiped my HSA card and rubbed my arms trying to relieve the itch.
Back in my car, I read the complicated directions: Take four pills today...blah, blah, blah.
I hadn't eaten much so I downed two pills and figured I'd take the other two after real food.
I seemed fine throughout the day.
Toward evening, my tummy was a little upset, and I went to bed early because I was so tired.
Being tired doesn't equate falling asleep so I read until about eleven o'clock.
At one o'clock, I awakened with an acidic burning in my throat and made a dash to throw up.
It seemed to be my old nemesis acid reflux on steroids.
Since I couldn't possibly lie down with the burning, I read the paperwork that came with the prescription.
Golly gee, some folks have nausea and vomiting with this medication.
Aren't I the lucky one?
After breakfast this morning, I took today's pills.
I immediately noticed a bitter taste.
"Wow, that was a bitter pill to swallow," I said.
I hadn't even noticed the bitterness the other time.
Talking about bitter pills to swallow, I thought about it figuratively as well as literally.
The expression "A bitter pill to swallow" means something unpleasant or painful but has to be accepted.
I thought about bitter pills that I've had to swallow in my lifetime.
The bitterest of all was when Jim was diagnosed with dementia.
Oh, neither of us accepted it at first, and that's not such a bad thing.
We explored all the other possibilities--a stroke, blood sugar, vitamin deficiencies, depression, heart problems--through an endless cycle of testing.
The rollercoaster of emotions came to a screeching halt when an MRI revealed brain shrinkage consistent with irreversible, unstoppable dementia.
Big bitter pill to swallow.
We all have our own bitter pills.
Some of us have broken relationships, undeniable mistakes, failures, heartache, illness, pain, suicidal thoughts, stress, bitterness, self-loathing, or many other human emotions.
Emotional victims can be emotional survivors with the correct resources or support.
Life throws pills at all of us, and full bottles at some.
It is so important not to lose our way or give up.
Fortitude is the antidote for the poison of adversity.
When going through difficult times, I have always been thankful that I'm not famous.
Just think of the stress on movie personalities, politicians, famous athletes, and others in the public eye.
Not only do they have to deal with their own doubts and embarrassing moments, all the armchair pundits worldwide have to throw in their holier-than-thou tweets, Facebook posts, blogs, op-eds.
We are creating an unhealthy virtual environment.
People used to do their rants and raves in the privacy of their homes where only family and close friends knew how bizarre they were.
Now, the internet explodes with conspiracy theories, blatant lies, and innuendos.
Friends and family use expletives in angry, small-minded conversations with others who aren't of the same political persuasion, religion, ethnic group, or were born with a different color skin.
It's disturbing that we feel that rudeness and hatefulness are acceptable.
As for my bitter pills, I remembered that a spoonful of sugar helps the medicine go down.
What kind of sugar do I have in my house this time of year?
Candy corn!
Two pieces of candy corn wiped the bitter taste from my mouth.
I've solved the literal bitter pill problem.
Even a semi-load of candy corn won't help the hurting people of the world to figuratively swallow a single bitter pill.
Copyright (c) September 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, September 21, 2016>
Today is World Alzheimer's Day.
Currently, an estimated 47 million people worldwide are living with dementia.
Alzheimer's is a global problem, and researchers around the world are working diligently to find a cure.
We already know that Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease in America.
It also has a devastating economic impact worldwide with a cost of $818 billion.
Healthcare for persons with dementia are too specialized which increases the cost.
According to the World Alzheimer's Report, "Currently, healthcare systems struggle to provide adequate coverage of diagnostic services, and care is too often fragmented, uncoordinated, and unresponsive to the needs of people with dementia and their families." A better approach, according to the report, would be to rebalance the services to primary and community with case management.
Case management could be more effective if (a) caseloads were manageable, (b) clearly defined with training and adequate preparation and (c) the case manager would be empowered to coordinate care among providers.
This sounds like the purpose of the HOPE for Alzheimer's Act!
We are looking forward to a world without Alzheimer's, but until then, the report rightly observes, palliative and hospice care needs to be improved for those with dementia.
It is important to consider preferences of people with dementia about end-of-life issues.
Only 40 - 50% of people with dementia have received a diagnosis.
The executive summary of the report concludes with, "We need to focus on achieving high coverage of dementia diagnosis and continuing care, both to ensure access to current evidence-based treatments and support, and to create systems and platforms with the capacity to deliver, with equity, much more effective treatments in the future." On World Alzheimer's Day 2016, advocates will continue in their efforts to increase research funding.
Caregivers will continue to care for their loved ones.
Hospice teams will help families face the inevitable end of this incurable disease.
Families will pick up the pieces and go on living without fathers, mothers, spouses, siblings, aunts, uncles, friends, or even children who die from dementia.
Resource: World Alzheimer's Report: https://www.alz.co.uk/research/WorldAlzheimerReport2016.pdf Copyright (c) September 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 11, 2016>
Saturday morning, Walk to End Alzheimer's day, was the big day we'd been planning for since shortly after the last walk.
A night of thunder and downpours had calmed to a spattering of rain.
Almost zero percent chance of rain, yet there it was big as life.
"It should be out of here by eight o'clock," Harold told me.
"We start set up at six," I groaned.
I pushed the button on the coffee pot.
For once, I'd prepared it the night before.
I might have been a little concerned about hearing the 4:30 alarm.
I had been loading my car for days in preparation for the Walk.
Banners, table, books, supplies, camera, notebook, clipboards, etc.
had been loaded and checked off my long list.
The first text of the day came in letting me know we were shooting for 6:30 to give the rain a chance to move out.
"You better put your books in a Rubbermaid," Harold said.
"Even if the rain quits, the ground will be wet."  "Good idea," I said.
For once, I had not worried about rain and had left the books in the shipping boxes.
We transferred books to the tub and Harold carried them to the car and placed them in the back seat like the final piece of a puzzle.
With my extra thirty minutes, I had time to sit down with a cup of coffee, and to look at the latest text messages.
WyAnn had run out of space in her vehicle, and Jessica's was already fully loaded.
I admitted, I was out of room in my car too.
Then, a text from my daughter-in-law asking if I needed her to bring her truck.
She offered to help WyAnn, but when I called, WyAnn had recruited help from family.
The rain let up, so I gathered my purse, water, and my just-in-case rain jacket.
On my way out the door, I saw the tub with my team's T-shirts.
I grabbed them up and put them in the passenger seat.
Harold, who planned on going to the walk at a more appropriate hour, opened the garage door for me and began to quiz me: Cell phone?
Camera?
Purse?
Yes, yes, and yes.
I slid into the driver's seat, slammed the door, and turned the key.
Click.
I didn't believe my ears.
My super dependable car didn't respond.
Another try...click.
"Raise the hood," Harold said.
"I don't know where the lever is," I replied.
I didn't recall raising the hood in the six years I've had the Malibu.
Still, finding the release was much easier than finding the battery.
It was well hidden.
I texted the group, "My car won't start.
I may be late." Then, I texted Stacey, and she said she was on the way.
I didn't even want to consider how long it would take us to transfer everything from one vehicle to the other.
About the time Stacey arrived, Harold had attached jumper cables and the car started.
"Don't shut it off until you get there," he warned me.
Stacey followed me to the fairgrounds.
I was anxious because I knew we only had a short time to set up.
When we arrived, the streets were lined with vehicles.
Oh, great, I thought, there's another event going on.
What?
There must have been twenty guys setting up tables and chairs, tents, banners, flags, and holy cow, to help me unload my vehicle.
I knew WyAnn said some of the baseball team from SFCC would be there to help, but we'd never had this much help!
For such a disastrous start, everything was smooth sailing after that.
The sky cleared and with a little help from my friends, and friends of friends, the stress just evaporated like a drop of water on a sunny day.
My son took my car to W-K while I was at the Walk.
That's when I learned my six-year battery had gone belly up.
How long had I owned my car?
Just a little over six years.
But, hey, the sun was shining, people were smiling, and with a little help from my friends and family, all was well.
Copyright (c) September 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 30, 2016>
Doctors don't want to diagnose a forgetful forty-nine year old with early onset dementia.
First, they look for tumors, vitamin deficiencies, stroke damage, or something as simple as prescription drug interactions.
After numerous tests eliminated other conditions, a doctor finally diagnosed Jim with dementia of the Alzheimer's type.
Jim was emphatic that he didn't have "that." The doctor that gave Jim the bad news was named Worth, and Jim immediately dubbed him "Dr.
Worthless."  I wasn't as sure as Jim was that the doctor was wrong.
After I contacted the Alzheimer's Association, I had attended a few support group sessions.
When my contact at the Association told me about the Memory Walk, as it was called at that time, I signed up for it and raised $600.
I didn't mention it to Jim since he was so adamant that all that was wrong with him was a stroke he had "five years ago." As the years passed, it was always "five years ago." One day he was looking at the newspaper and saw an article about an upcoming Memory Walk in Sedalia.
"I have trouble with my memory," he said, "and I'd like to go to this walk." Well.
The Big Bad Wolf wouldn't have had to huff and puff very hard at all to knock me over.
We showed up at Liberty Park on a warm September day in 1998.
We quickly discovered that we were the only two people from Sedalia.
Still, we walked, and Jim's Team has walked in every Sedalia Walk since that day.
With this year's Sedalia Walk coming up in less than two weeks, my thoughts turned to our team name this morning.
Jim's Team--what a natural choice.
Jim's Team turned out to be so much more than a Walk team.
Jim's Team was really all the people it took to help him, and me, through the dark days of dementia.
Jim's Team was made up of family, friends, co-workers, neighbors, and occasionally total strangers who stepped up to offer a helping hand when it was needed.
Included on Jim's Team were physicians, nurses and nurses aids, housekeeping, social workers, and, eventually, hospice.
Every step of the way, we needed the support and guidance provided by the Alzheimer's Association.
We needed the prayer team who never forgot us, and the love team who never gave up on either of us.
You can never underestimate the "doer" team, the ones that didn't just offer, "if you need anything," but instead came up with, "I'll mow your grass," or "here's a cobbler I baked." What would we ever have done without the companion team--"I'll drive you to Kansas City for your doctor's visit," and "here, I'll help you get Jim loaded into the car." Everyone that stood by us and helped us was a part of Jim's Team.
The core team was immediate family: Jim's mom and my two sons.
They were the ones that helped me make the tough decisions: making it through day-to-day, home care, the nursing home decision, and heartbreaking health care decisions.
They had my back at all times.
Jim's Team held us in their embrace and listened to my rants, dried my tears, and made me laugh when I thought that was impossible.
Jim's Team made all the difference in his and my quality of life.
Jim passed away April 18, 2005, but Jim's Team continues to walk in his honor and in honor of others lost to dementia.
Over the years, Jim's Team has raised around $50,000.
In less than two weeks, we walk again.
In my heart, I'll remember Jim's joy during that first Walk.
I'll think about the good times, bury the heartache, and hope that someday soon researchers will find a cure making Alzheimer's a distant memory.
To join, or donate, to Jim's Team, click here or on the Walk to End Alzheimer's logo.
Copyright (c) August 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 25, 2016>
When Jim returned from Vietnam, he was stationed at Fort Riley, and we spent about a year and a half living in Manhattan, Kansas.
With barely enough money to get by, we often took drives in the country for entertainment.
We explored the back roads, and often toured tiny towns that were barely blips on the maps.
Not that it mattered to us, because we never used a map.
Jim had a good sense of direction, and eventually, we'd wind up at the small apartment where we lived.
He always said, "All roads lead to home." One summer day, we headed down this long, winding road through the middle of nowhere just to see what we could see.
Our car didn't have an air conditioner, so we drove with all four windows down and breezy hot air gave us the illusion of bearable heat.
After driving for about an hour, we rounded a corner to see a big sign that said, "Dead End." "Wouldn't you think they would have put that sign several miles back?" I grumped.
It didn't help that I was pregnant and couldn't seem to get comfortable.
Jim, on the other hand, handled the situation by merely turning around and going back the same road.
Life's bumpy road has significant, unexpected detours, and dead ends, that change the course of our lives.
My life's journey, of course, was forever altered when Jim developed dementia.
Sometimes, when life gets about as bad as it can possibly get, it takes a turn for the better.
I had to remind myself of better days ahead last Saturday when I went to a memorial service for Linda Newkirk, a woman who became my mentor, champion, and my friend.
On the drive over, I thought about Linda and the positive influence she had been in my life.
When I came up with the idea for Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love, Linda was the Executive Director of our local Alzheimer's chapter.
In my memories, I could still see her smile and appreciated her wholehearted support of the project.
She, Joetta, and another staff member selected the stories.
Linda helped me promote the book and offered her encouragement throughout the entire process.
Because of Linda, I had the audacity to believe I could gather up slice-of-life stories and publish those stories in a book.
Publishing the Alzheimer's Anthology was one of those pivotal moments that launched more than a book--it launched a new and exciting chapter of my life.
During an invitation to share memories, several individuals spoke about how Linda had been a positive influence on their lives.
Her sons talked about how much courage she showed in the face of a terminal illness.
Her main concern during her last days was not that she was dying, but her worry that her family would be devastated.
Linda was a woman of strong faith, and she rested easy knowing that God was good, and He would hold her in His loving embrace.
I felt compelled to share my memories of her.
The enormity of losing a woman who had done so much for me threatened my composure.
My voice was a little shaky as I fought back the tears, but in a couple of minutes, I paid homage to the pivotal role Linda played in my life.
I don't remember my exact words, but I ended with "I will never forget how she completely changed my life, and I'll never forget her." Throughout life's journey, we encounter people who have more confidence in us than we have in ourselves.
Because of them, we have the courage to leave the familiar path we're traveling, and go into the unchartered territory of a new direction.
We take a chance on navigating the route without an itinerary or a map.
I left the memorial and headed home with gratitude in my heart that Linda had been part of my life's story.
With her radiant smile, dignity, encouragement, generosity, and kind heart, she provided a living example of how to walk through this world.
Through courage and faith, she demonstrated that she knew the way to her Heavenly home.
She broke the chains of earthly tribulations and embraced the joy of God's amazing grace.
Copyright (c) August 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 10, 2016>
Going to line-dancing exercise class was one of the best decisions I've made in the last year.
It was by chance that I saw Ruth Dale's offer of free line-dancing classes.
I commented that it sounded like fun, and she encouraged me to try it.
At an SBW meeting later that same week, a few of us decided to check it out.
Friday rolled around and I worried about my ability to learn a structured dance.
In high school, I loved to dance, but I was mostly a free-form dancer.
Or as my dance partner at a school dance observed, it looked like I was stomping on bugs.
First day of class, I caught on to a few basic moves--left vine, right vine.
Some dances were easy to learn--the cupid shuffle.
Others were more challenging for me--the watermelon crawl.
The dance we learned this week--the wrong way--sums it all up.
I've been working especially hard on this dance since, "You're going the wrong way," was one of the few phrases Jim could say after dementia stole his language skills.
This phrase was always directed at me, and it usually meant I hadn't understood what he was trying to tell me.
Sometimes, I admit, I was actually going the wrong way.
I like to do some heavy thinking while I drive.
My radio is always on the Blend, and the music relaxes me and sets my mind in fast forward.
This morning, I was indulging in some creative thinking, and as a result, I took the scenic route to the dietitian's office.
The dietitian, Angela, is another good decision I made this year.
She helped get me back on track after a two-year hiatus from healthy eating and regular exercise.
Now, I have a second chance to get back on track after basically wrecking the train.
I give Angela credit for helping me "Fuel Up Right," one of the Alzheimer's Association's "10 Ways to Love Your Brain." Eating a balanced diet lower in fat and higher in fruits and veggies is a piece of cake.
Ooops, no cake.
Bad cake.
Oh, well, maybe occasionally a sliver of chocolate cake.
What I've undertaken isn't really a diet and exercise plan.
It's a lifestyle change.
Behavioral strategies are an excellent way to reduce risk of Alzheimer's.
A new lifestyle is my ticket to a healthier me--body, mind, and spirit.
1)      Body: Since I joined line dancing and pay attention to what goes into my mouth, I've lost eleven pounds.
That's not as much as I want to lose, but it's a darn good start.
I feel better, stronger, and healthier than I have in a long time.
According to my physician, dancing builds stronger bones and improves muscle tone.
2)      Mind: Learning new dances exercises my mind.
Brain stimulation helps stave off Alzheimer's.
My brain is on overdrive as I try to remember the steps to a complex dance.
Ruth likes to challenge us with new dances.
The variety of the dances keeps the class fresh, interesting, and, best of all, fun!
3)      Spirit: Line-dancing exercise classes have given me the opportunity to make new friends.
We have laughed, cried, and prayed together.
We've danced together in class and out-and-about.
I'm so blessed to know these happy footed gals and guys!
Line dancing applies to several of the Alzheimer's Association's "10 Ways to Love Your Brain." I've got "Buddy Up," or be social, covered with my new friends!
Another way to improve brain health is to "Break a Sweat." Well, this happens every time we dance.
Tuesday evening, I complained about the room being cold when we first got there.
By the time we finished dancing, I was fanning myself.
Go figure.
"Stump Yourself" involves challenging your mind.
I'm challenging my mind one dance at a time.
Biggest question when Ruth tells us what dance we will be doing is, "How does that start?" After the first few steps, the brain usually, key word usually, kicks in.
How about "Take Care of Your Mental Health"?
Depression is linked to mental decline.
It's impossible to be around my line-dancing friends and be depressed.
In fact, that is the perfect place to go when things aren't going right.
Dancing and listening to music are two things that put me in that happy place before I can count to four.
Life isn't all about dancing, or is it?
Yes, I think it might be!
Copyright (c) August 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 3, 2016>
I was sitting in church a few weeks ago and caught a hint of an unusual scent.
I tried to decipher what it could possibly be, and thought I detected a hint of vanilla mixed with a light floral fragrance.
It seemed odd that I caught only a whiff of the pleasant smell, and then it was gone.
After church, I made a trip to Walmart.
As I rounded the canned vegetable aisle, there was the same scent--illusive, and a little bit creepy, to tell the truth.
Nice smelling ghosts aside, this phantom smell concerned me.
I had heard that smelling something that wasn't there could be a sign of something going wrong in the brain--tumors and dementia at the top of the list.
Phantosmia, olfactory hallucination, can be deadly serious.
I loaded my groceries, jumped in my car, and turned on the ignition.
The air conditioner kicked on, and I breathed in the fragrance again!
That's when it dawned on me--the unusual smell was from the new body lotion I'd put on my arms that morning.
Well, I was relieved that I'd solved the mystery and dodged that neurological disorder bullet in one fell swoop.
We are surrounded by odors, pleasant and unpleasant.
Some of our strongest memories are tied to smells.
Harold and I were in the shop working on his latest project when I caught the smell of freshly sawed lumber.
Immediately, I thought of Jim and me building his mom's house and then ours.
By building, I don't mean hire a contractor.
We didn't have money for that!
We strapped on our tool belts and went to work.
Jim could smack a nail a few times with his hammer and drive it home.
I "Lizzy Borden-ed" my nails.
About forty whacks later, I'd be there too.
Scents are a time machine.
A recent article I read talked about how our noses are important memory tools.
Our sense of smell can stimulate the brain to remember.
The article in the caring.com newsletter said, "Although someone with severe-stage dementia may seem beyond all interaction, you may be able to reach in and connect through smell."  Odors can be used to influence mood.
Aromatherapy can stimulate different moods or emotions.
Some scents, lavender, for example, are soothing and can be helpful for insomniacs.
Peppermint and rosemary are believed to be stimulating.
Peppermint might also remind a loved one of Christmas.
For me, wintergreen makes me think of being sick--Pepto-Bismol.
In fact, the very smell makes me queasy.
What about those candles or plug-ins that smell like sugar cookies?
That brings back memories of my mother-in-law Virginia preparing dozens of sugar cookies for care packages to family members.
The trouble is, those scents make me hungry!
And the smell of cinnamon drives me insane for Virginia's cinnamon rolls.
The smell of crayons or a freshly sharpened #2 pencil will bring up mental images of the first grade.
I didn't go to kindergarten so first grade was my introduction to a schoolroom.
My older brother, Tommy, ever helpful, dropped me off at the room.
He tried to prepare me for my new experience by telling me the pencil sharpener was at the back of the room.
All was well, until I panicked when I couldn't figure out exactly what the pencil sharpener was supposed to look like.
I started crying.
Of course, they went and got my brother to calm me down.
He later said that I cried every day of first grade, but I think that is an exaggeration.
We can smell our way back to our younger years, or even our childhood.
Wouldn't it be great if we only remembered the happy smells and not the icky ones?
Sometimes, we don't get to choose which memories our sniffer triggers, because the nose knows our oldest and most deeply rooted memories.
Resource: https://www.caring.com/articles/scents-and-dementia Copyright (c) August 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 26, 2016>
Living near Whiteman AFB, I see stealth bombers and fighter jets on a regular basis.
I was walking my dog a few weeks ago and a pair of fighter jets flew overhead.
It made me pause and think about how I had no fear of bombs raining down from the sky.
The truth is I feel lucky to live in a country where we don't worry about our enemies dropping bombs on our homes.
Lately, I've seen more hate than I've ever seen in my life.
It is true that during the Vietnam War protesters were on the news every night taking out their frustration on those drafted into fighting.
The death and destruction of war invaded our homes.
During that turbulent era, reporters reported the news during a thirty-minute or one-hour broadcast, then they were finished until the next day.
Now, we have twenty-four hour politically biased TV pseudo-news, the Internet, and social media.
Constant exposure whips some folks into a lather.
The truth is hate doesn't solve anything; it just increases the problems.
If you aren't part of the solution, you may well be part of the problem.
Do you really love your political candidate more than your own family?
If you do, I find you to be a scary person with messed up loyalties.
Do you really think you can change someone's mind by throwing a hissy fit every time he disagrees with you?
Tantrums might be cute in a toddler, but ridiculous in an adult.
The truth is that it's easier to believe lies, innuendoes, and gossip than to seek the truth.
Lies destroy lives.
This is especially true in politics.
Baseless rumors dressed up as memes on social media are shared with thousands or millions without regard to the human being targeted.
Apparently, sharing this crap is more important than how offensive and reprehensible it is to family and friends.
The truth is life isn't fair.
Never has been, never will be.
Bad things happen to good people and bad people prosper.
Jim was a good man and, if the world had been fair, his life would have never been cut short by dementia.
If life were really fair, lightning bolts would strike down truly evil people who have gone beyond redemption.
The truth is cruelty should not be tolerated.
Cruel people are ugly people from the inside out.
When we support cruelty, or give it a wink, we are responsible for our own actions or reactions.
Selfishness damages the hearts of people who love you.
Lately, I've witnessed feuding among family members causing pain for their mother, unkind "dramatic" actions spewing anger at a friend, and treating a person with dementia as if he is no longer human and can't be hurt.
The truth is we are all human regardless of religion, nationality, race, sexual orientation, political party, or economic status.
Each classification has good, bad, and indifferent people.
There is an ultimate danger in lumping everyone with a common denominator under a single umbrella of hate or dehumanization.
On the other hand, you can't put your trust in someone for the simple reason he falls within one of those categories.
Bad people do bad things without regard to your preconceived opinion.
Good people come from all walks of life and diverse backgrounds.
The truth is love hurts.
We like to think that love equates happiness, but just as high as the highs, the lows are not only low, they can be rock bottom.
Love can be a weapon, a bargaining chip, or the most unselfish act in the world.
How you use love defines you as a human being.
I've discovered throughout my life that either you love someone or you don't.
Infatuation is not love.
Lust is not love.
Admiration is not love.
Saying "I love you" is not love.
You don't have to look far to see what love is: 1 Corinthians 13:4-8.
Love is patient, love is kind.
It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud.
It does not dishonor others, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs.
At least with the people we love, each of us should strive to become less judgmental when they believe differently than we do.
The truth is this would be a scary world, indeed, if we all thought alike.
Thoughtful and respectful differences are a good thing.
We need to become truth seekers.
Copyright (c) July 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, July 14, 2016>
When we went to the Pettis County Queen Contest, we certainly hoped that contestant #3, my granddaughter Whitney, would win.
I was probably more nervous than Whitney when she walked out onto the stage, sat on the barstool, and began to play her ukulele and sing, "I Can't Help Falling in Love with You." Whitney had never performed in front of anyone other than immediate family.
After hearing the first few notes, I knew she was going to nail it.
Tears blurred my eyes as I thought of how proud her Grandpa Jim would have been of her.
I can only imagine the pride he would feel to have a granddaughter inherit his natural music ability.
After she was crowned Miss Pettis County, Whitney was interviewed for the local news.
She told the Sedalia Democrat reporter that she felt Grandpa Jim's presence throughout the competition, and especially during the talent.
I knew she was thinking of her grandpa when she answered her on- stage interview question: "If you could change or create a new law, what would it be?" Her response was "I would enact a law making access for funds for early onset dementia patients more easily accessible." She went on to explain that dementia is an incredibly expensive disease.
Early onset dementia affects the entire family.
From an early age, our grandkids knew their grandpa had a disease that affected his memory.
When Whitney was not quite two years old, she was old enough to know that grandpa couldn't go outside by himself because he could get lost.
One day when Whitney was staying with us, we went next door to visit Jim's mom.
Jim was restless and pacing, and casually worked his way toward the door.
Whitney spotted him and jumped into the doorway spreading her arms and legs to barricade the door.
"No, Papa Jim!" she said with all the authority she could muster.
Jim stopped in front of her, turned around, and sat down in the recliner.
Whitney has a passion to be a volunteer and advocate for Alzheimer's.
She has walked with Jim's Team at the Memory Walk/Walk to End Alzheimer's since she was a toddler.
She has gone to the Alzheimer's Forum in Washington, D.C., twice to advocate for Alzheimer's research funding and legislation to help persons with Alzheimer's and their families.
Whitney was only seven years old, when her grandpa died.
If early onset dementia had not cut his life short, Grandpa Jim would have taught Whitney how to play the ukulele, and she wouldn't have had to learn from a YouTube video.
He would have loved to sing harmony with her and played along on his guitar.
We are all proud of Whitney!
We know her beauty is not just skin deep.
She is an accomplished young woman with a bright future.
She just graduated high school and enters college in the fall as a junior.
In the meantime, she has queenly duties and appearances to make.
Volunteering at Child Safe's Color Run this weekend will be a breeze after her obligatory duties at the Smithton Fair, including wading into a mud pit to catch a pig and dress it.
Next month during the Missouri State Fair, Whitney will compete in the State Fair Queen Contest.
We'll all be there to cheer her on to victory.
When Whitney walks onto the stage holding her ukulele, Grandpa Jim will be present in our hearts and minds--bursting with pride and grinning from ear to ear.
Copyright (c) July 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, July 7, 2016>
Last week, I was getting ready to go to my Alzheimer's board meeting and decided to take the dog outside before I left.
As I walked past the tubs of tomato, sweet potato, and pepper plants, I noticed another of those pesky Japanese beetles crawling along the grapevine that twines across the lattice work.
We'd been trying to get rid of the beetles for weeks.
They had skeletonized the grape leaves and I could swear they were eyeballing our tomato plants.
After reviewing information from the Master Gardener's, we had tried a couple of recommended ideas to get rid of them.
One of the recommendations  was to pick them off.
My first reaction had been "Ewwweee" but after a couple of weeks, that didn't seem to be a bad idea.
I never thought about the beetle squirming in my hand in a bid for survival.
When I went to throw it down, I whacked the back of my hand on the handle of the dog leash.
Hard!
It puffed up like a bad case of rheumatoid arthritis.
Well, I iced it, had it x-rayed, put in a splint, and looked at by an orthopedic doc.
Verdict was that it wasn't broken and the tendons were where they were supposed to be.
My hand was a small reminder of how difficult life can become.
We never realize how great something is until things go wrong and it doesn't work right.
When things go wrong, we can easily be persuaded to pay more attention to what is wrong than what is right.
I know how true that was as a caregiver.
It was a constant struggle to schedule substitute care while I was at work.
Sometimes I had to remind myself that I was so lucky to have a big family and people who were willing to go the extra mile to help me keep Jim safe.
But things went wrong--he wandered away, he was stubborn, he paced, he scared some of the hired help.
I can still remember Jim's frustration when he couldn't find the right words, or when he made a grocery list and later noticed he had transposed letters.
When his mechanical brain quit functioning correctly, he remembered how to take the vacuum apart, but not how to put it together again.
His musical knowledge slipped away and he couldn't remember song lyrics or what chords to use.
In the category of things going awry, no one has ever been exempt.
Even people, who seem to lead golden lives, have catastrophes.
To make it worse, those who live in view of the public often have their personal disasters plastered all over the tabloids, Internet, or even mainstream news where armchair quarterbacks nationwide critique their failures.
Just recently, parents have been skewered over the flames of self-righteousness for not being watchful of their children.
People expressed their outrage toward the mother of a three-year-old child who wound up in a guerilla pit at the Cincinnati zoo.
Fortunately, that child lived and no charges were filed against the mother.
Another child was allowed to wade in a lagoon near a Disney's Grand Floridian Resort and was attacked and killed by an alligator.
The child was too young to read the "no swimming" signs, and the parents did not realize the danger in ignoring the warning.
Before we are too quick to judge, I think maybe we should consider the times when things could have went wrong, but didn't.
Our lives can be upended in a heartbeat.
People can have life changing injuries in an accident.
My accident was small, but not having the use of my right hand for a couple of days created more problems than I would have thought possible.
Signing a check left handed may have been the highlight.
Heaven knows what the bank is going to think of those scribbles!
More than a week after the hand-whack-gone-wrong, my hand still hurts and remains swollen.
I still have two fingers that don't always do what they should, which makes typing incredibly challenging.
Less than a month ago, I didn't even know what a Japanese beetle looked like, much less that one would be responsible for an injury.
Until things went wrong, I didn't realize just how good things were!
Copyright (c) July 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 25, 2016>
When Jim joined the army and went to Vietnam, my biggest worry was that he wouldn't come home.
I breathed a huge sigh of relief when he got off the plane in Kansas City, never expecting that part of his mind would always remain in the jungle.
He had PTSD before it had a name, but even though we didn't know what to call it, we knew its insidious nature.
Jim went through years of depression.
He spent time in a stress unit, trying to deal with the dark feelings that brought him down to lower and lower levels.
Jim would sometimes tell me, "You would be better off without me" trying to prepare me when suicide seemed the way out of the living nightmare brought on by PTSD.
The final insult to Jim's quality of life was when dementia played more havoc with his brain.
The odd thing about dementia is that as it robs a person of short-term memory, long-term memory seems more recent.
One day in a restaurant, Jim began to sob uncontrollably as he vividly recalled an incident from Vietnam.
I always believed that Jim's tour of duty had much more to do with his dementia than the VA would ever admit.
Researchers agree that a definite link exists between PTSD and dementia.
A study conducted by the U.S. Department of Defense concluded that veterans with PTSD are 77% more likely to develop dementia than veterans who do not have it.
I've been an advocate for Alzheimer's research for several years.
Currently, I am the Alzheimer's Ambassador for Congresswoman Vicky Hartzler.
When I visit the Congresswoman or her staff, I always know they are listening.
I've often been pleasantly surprised when she goes beyond my expectations.
Today, I read Congresswoman Hartzler's newsletter and saw an article, "Expanding Alzheimer's Research." She proposed an amendment to the FY2017 Department of Defense Appropriations Bill to increase funding for Alzheimer's research.
When proposing the amendment, Hartzler said, "Alzheimer's is a heartbreaking disease devastating lives, crushing families, and potentially bankrupting our nation." In her newsletter, she said, "Studies show our soldiers are at a higher risk of developing Alzheimer's due to the nature of their service.
Focusing research on their conditions can not only help prevent this disease from ravishing our veterans, it can also provide hope for millions of Americans at risk or suffering from the disease." The amendment supplements the Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program of the Department of Defense Health Program by an additional $5 million, bringing the total to $20 million.
The amendment to the Department of Defense appropriations bill passed on the House floor (282-138) earlier this week.
I am deeply grateful to Vicky Hartzler for looking out for our veterans and the more than five million Americans who currently have Alzheimer's disease.
Copyright (c) June 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 14, 2016>
June is Alzheimer's and Brain Awareness Month.
The Alzheimer's Association has released a document listing truths about Alzheimer's disease.
I'm familiar with all the truths, and I've been sharing them on social media.
The truth I want to focus on today is that Alzheimer's is not a normal part of aging.
Age is a risk factor and our odds of getting the disease increase as we grow older.
Alzheimer's progressively destroys the brain, relentlessly stripping away reasoning, memory, and personality.
I've never really worried too much about my brain as long as it clicks along doing its job efficiently and effectively.
Sometimes, I get frustrated when I can't retrieve an important fact or detail at the time I need the information.
At other times, random memories, or thoughts, pop to the forefront, and in my haste to share, I start in the middle of a conversation.
It takes awhile for me to realize no one else has a clue as to what I'm talking about, and I need to start at the beginning.
One thing I've always noticed is that when I'm stressed, I do not think clearly.
While I was reading up on brains this Sunday morning, it became clear that I'm not alone with this problem.
Research shows that stress, especially long-term stress or PTSD, affects the white matter of our brains and can cause damage.
Unless white matter does its job unhindered, our brains can't retrieve all the information stored in our gray matter.
The gray matter is where our memories, emotions, speech, and sensory perceptions are stored.
I found a clear example of how white and gray matter work together to make our brain the wondrous organ it is.
The gray matter of our brains can be compared to a series of computers and the white matter compared to the network cables that connect the computers together.
I found this much more helpful than all the scientific explanations of neurons, glia, and long words that I could never pretend to pronounce.
I've always suspected there was a big difference between early onset, or young onset, Alzheimer's and the effect of the disease on older persons.
WebMD had an article that talked about how early onset Alzheimer's can damage the white matter of the brain and how this damage can be undetected.
Early onset affects several parts of the brain and can begin with reasoning, planning, and problem solving, but Alzheimer's later in life may first be noticed as memory loss.
Research shows that a healthy diet, exercising your body and brain (puzzles, anyone?
), and social interaction help keep your brain doing what brains should do.
The bottom line is that our brain matter matters!
Copyright (c) June 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 8, 2016>
I was raised to believe that it was a mark of character to treat everyone as equals and to always consider myself as an equal to anyone.
Raising a family of eight children was not an easy task in the '50s and '60s.
My mom and dad both worked hard to see that we were fed and clothed.
Extras were not an option.
We didn't have much in worldly possessions, but our parents made sure that each of us kids had a sense of self-worth, and that money or social status didn't make snooty people better than we were.
They also taught us to never, ever look down on the less fortunate.
When I married Jim, I married a man with the same principles.
Jim strongly  believed in standing up for what was right.
He came home from Vietnam with a neck injury that would not heal.
After he was discharged, we went to St. Louis to get a service connection.
It should have been a slam dunk--but wait--the V.A.
had lost his medical records.
Jim was smart enough to know he needed representation, and our DAV rep marched back into the records room and returned with Jim's "lost" medical records in ten minutes.
Jim was tenacious when it came to what is right is right.
He entered into a four-decade battle with the V.A.
keeping his claim open.
During that time, the V.A.
Hospital left metal fragments in his neck during surgery, charged our insurance through my employer for service-connected surgery, and treated Jim with a lack of respect.
Oh, do you think Jim let them get away with any of those travesties?
Not a chance.
What's right is right.
No doubt, Jim learned some of his tenaciousness from his mother, my beloved mother-in-law Virginia.
She was a bulldog when it came to equal and fair treatment for her children.
The adjective that describes her best is feisty.
Virginia, who served her husband and family with love and devotion, was often known to say, "What's sauce for the goose, is sauce for the gander." She believed in the Golden Rule, and wouldn't stand quietly by when it came to injustice.
I never had Jim or Virginia's constant tenaciousness.
Mine is more sporadic and, you might say, mission oriented.
One of my missions involves being an Alzheimer's advocate.
I've discovered going the extra distance makes a difference.
As an advocate for Alzheimer's, I've learned that working in the system can bring about amazing results.
I've seen a lot of change during my 16 trips to D.C. as an Alzheimer's advocate and ambassador.
We had only small successes for the first 14 years.
However, in the past week, we advocates received two exciting pieces of news.
The U.S. Senate Labor-HHS Appropriations Subcommittee approved our requested $400 million increase in Alzheimer's research funding for FY2017.
In addition, the Health Outcomes, Planning, and Education (HOPE) for Alzheimer's Act (S. 857/H.R.
1559) has been included in the Senate Labor, Health and Human Services (Labor-HHS) Appropriations Committee FY2017 Funding Bill.
The HOPE for Alzheimer's Act addresses a critical gap in care and support.
Both of these pieces of legislation will help rectify some of the inequities of the past when Alzheimer's was swept under the proverbial carpet, and five million Americans and their families were left without hope.
As an advocate, I've worked with good people in both major political parties.
This is one reason I try to stay out of political discussions on Facebook or in the news.
Sometimes I have to sit on my hands, and I've deleted a lot of sites from my newsfeed.
An item popped up this morning that just underscored that goose and gander sauce still isn't the same.
The big news today is how much Hillary Clinton spends on her clothes.
To be completely politically unbiased, Sarah Palin went through the same scrutiny.
Have you ever once seen how much a male candidate pays for his custom suits, silk ties, or shoes?
Well, I haven't.
What's right is right.
Injustice and inequalities will always exist.
Sometimes we can only chip away at one small thing at a time.
One of the lessons I've learned from people I truly admire is that what's sauce for the goose, should be equal to the sauce for the gander.
I'm not the world's greatest cook, but I know a little bit about making sauce.
For it to be good, it takes careful preparation.
It must be mixed perfectly from the right ingredients, stirred as needed, left to simmer, and then stirred again.
If done perfectly, it turns out just right.
Copyright (c) June 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 29, 2016>
Memorial weekend has always been a time to reflect on those who have gone on to a better place.
"Decoration Day" originated following the Civil War to honor those who died while fighting in the war.
General John A. Logan, representing northern Civil War Veterans, called for the nation to decorate the graves of those who died during the war and whose bodies were buried throughout the land.
He chose the date of May 30 because it did not coincide with any major battle.
The first Decoration Day was celebrated at Arlington where 20,000 Union and Confederate soldiers were buried.
After General James Garfield's speech, volunteers decorated the graves of the war dead.
The holiday became known as Memorial Day and during World War I, it became a day to remember all who died in battle.
In 1971, the date was changed to the last Monday in May to comply with the 1968 Uniform Monday Holiday Act.
Since 2005, I've always driven to Missouri Veterans Cemetery at Higginsville for the Memorial Day ceremony and to place flowers in front of Jim's niche.
This year, thinking ahead, I purchased flowers on Friday.
Saturday morning, my son asked me if I wanted to go to Higginsville with him and his family.
After giving it a few moments thought, I quickly made the decision that a day with family would be a better way to spend the day.
Sort of an answer to the question: what would Jim do?
After our visit to the Missouri Veteran's Cemetery, we decided to get a few stamps on my grandkid's "Passport" to Missouri's numerous state parks and historical sites.
They already had one "stamp" and decided to pick up a couple more.
The Veterans Cemetery is next to the Confederate Cemetery and only a short distance from the Battle of Lexington State Historic site.
We spent a day learning more about the war that began the entire tradition of the holiday.
The weekend of remembrance continued on with church services this morning.
We were encouraged to write the names of loved ones who had passed away on a piece of yellow paper and place them on a wreath at the front of the sanctuary.
As I was sitting, head bowed, during a moment of prayer, an image of Jim popped into my mind.
He had a big smile on his face and stood at a  split-rail fence, with one foot propped up on a rail.
I couldn't help but wonder if it was a memory or a visual reassurance of the here and now.
A thought crossed my mind that because dementia snatched him away, I'll never know what he would have looked like as an old man.
Jim was a veteran, and although he didn't lose his life in Vietnam, he certainly lost some of his spirit.
I'll never forget how devastated he was the first time we visited the Wall in Washington, D.C. Every day is Memorial Day at the Wall.
Judging from the traffic this weekend, I'd say most people are more interested in the three-day holiday than anything to do with Memorial Day itself.
Picnics and celebrations abound during this holiday weekend.
Isn't it a little strange to say "Happy Memorial Day" or "have fun this weekend"?
Maybe, maybe not.
After all, our love of life and country are made possible because of the men and women who offered up, or made, the ultimate sacrifice.
We need to appreciate the legacy they left us, and in turn, pay it forward to the next generation.
Copyright (c) May 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 19, 2016>
My graduation from WWU 2005 As always, May is a turning point in young lives everywhere.
The caps and gowns are a visible symbol of young people leaving the comfortable nest of home and "Pomp and Circumstance" into  the "real world." My two oldest grandchildren both earned the all important diploma to signify their accomplishments--one a college degree and the other finished high-school headed off to college.
Although I've been with them through the years, it doesn't seem possible they are both adults now.
I can imagine how proud their Grandpa Jim would have been!
The grandkids were the center of his life, before his real world became a scary and confusing place.
I can't help but compare the world today to what it was when I graduated high school long, long ago.
When I was a teenager,  problems and failures were private family business, not shared with the world via the internet.
I probably have a dozen photos of me growing up, but now kids may have a dozen photos posted online in a single day.
In my wildest imagination, I could never have predicted a time when we would carry around a device in our pockets with access to the entire world at our fingertips.
I couldn't have foreseen flipping through hundreds of channels on a television set.
We had three channels and the remote control was whichever  kid was told to turn the channel, and rotate the antenna.
We still don't have flying cars like the Jetson's had, but some have truly amazing optional features available: Cars that warn you if someone is in your blind spot, adjustable everything, and cameras that seem to know exactly where to point.
My son told a story about his daughter sitting in an older vehicle.
Looking around, she pointed at the manual window crank, and asked, "What's that for?" "You roll the window down with it," my son said, demonstrating.
"Well, that's just stupid," she said.
Things that seem stupid now were commonplace not so long ago.
My pursuit of a degree was delayed due to having children and then going through many years of trying to stretch the dollars to pay the bills.
I received an associate's degree from a community college when my kids were young, but didn't get my bachelor's until 2005.
School certainly changed between high school and community college.
I tested out of a math class in junior college without realizing that it wasn't considered cheating to use a calculator.
Who knew?
By the time I was working on my bachelors, I had a PC and internet.
I took online classes.
One of my classes required us to check out websites and evaluate them for trustworthiness.
In many ways, getting my degree later in life gave me skills and confidence to tap into the power of technology.
The changes I've seen throughout my lifetime, make me realize how mind boggling the world will be in another century.
What will the world be like for my grandchildren when they are my age?
What will the "real world" be like then?
Copyright (c) May 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 10, 2016>
Jim in Oregon 1994 A few mornings ago, my husband woke me up.
"You're a bed hog and I have proof," he said.
I opened one eye and glanced at the photo on his phone.
The photo clearly showed me sprawled facedown with arms and legs stretched out to cover the entire bed.
One leg was out from other the covers, and I was rocking the blue plaid pajamas and red and white polka-dot socks.
"I'm going to sign into your Facebook account and make this your profile picture," Harold said, teasing me.
"Knock yourself out," I said, as I rolled over and went back to sleep.
We live in an age where anything can be captured in a digital photo.
That can be good, or it can be bad.
Photos and video clips have caused riots, property damage, and deaths.
On the flipside, photos can touch us in a special way when we see the beauty of a tiny newborn baby, a cute animal, or a digital version of an old family photo.
Because of the capability of social media photo sharing, I've had the pleasure of seeing photos for the first time although they were taken decades ago.
These photos can bring back memories of times long gone by.
These rare, family photos reside in a file on my Iomega external drive where I can access them at my convenience.
I've always enjoyed taking photos.
Jim was the videographer, but I was the snapshot queen.
Before any special occasion, I stocked up on rolls of film.
A roll of film would take 24 or 36 photos.
How well they would turn out was always a surprise.
The occasion would be long past by the time the film was processed.
Even worse were double exposures.
Some cameras did not automatically advance the film, or you could accidently run the same roll through twice.
One time when Eric was a baby, we took a roll of film capturing some memories.
Unfortunately, when the pictures came back, they were of another family.
I didn't have any luck tracking down our photos, and the other family's vacation photos were never returned to them.
Photos can help us remember small moments as well as the important times in our lives.
I recently looked through an album of photos taken during one of our Oregon trips in 1994.
It brought back memories of how Jim loved to travel, especially to Oregon.
Jim enjoyed showing me out-of-the-way places--and of course, the back roads.
When Jim's memory was fading, he still recognized some people in photos.
I came home from work one day and the caregiver said, "He showed me the picture of your daughter's wedding." Jim had pointed to the photo of our son's recent marriage.
He said, "Stacey's wedding." For some reason, he had trouble remembering our son's name, but he had correctly identified the bride.
I fixed up a few small photo albums for Jim to keep at the nursing home.
One day he tapped his finger on a photo of his brother and his wife and said, "Bob and Barb."   At a recent three-day conference, I took nearly 500 photos.
At one point my 16 GB memory card was full and I deleted enough duplicate photos that I could keep on shooting snapshots.
The photos I had taken did not fill the card, but I left downloaded photos on the camera card until I was sure I had backed up the photo files.
I'm in the process of organizing my "red drive" where I store my photos.
So far, I have nearly 80,000 photos stored in 5,530 files.
My digital photos make organizing the boxes of printed photos seem quite underwhelming.
I rarely print photos anymore, but when I do, I no longer have to wait patiently to see how they will turn out.
I can enlarge them on my screen and crop, zoom in, enhance the lighting or color.
I don't have to worry about them being lost with one-hour photo.
Snapshots are visual memories.
Some will be treasured by our descendents and others will be relegated to the recycle bin.
In the meantime, trips down memory lane are just a few clicks away.
Copyright (c) May 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 28, 2016>
I spent the weekend at the BWM State Conference with my Business Women of Missouri sisters.
I always come away from these conferences energized and with new, fresh, or possibly refreshed, ideas.
One such refreshed idea came during an organizing session.
Organizing presentations have a way of highlighting my inadequacies.
It's not that I don't know the basics of organization, or even that I don't follow some of them, but I'm an out-of-sight-out- of- mind person.
I use To-Do lists, but there's nothing like seeing a pile of unfinished paperwork to motivate me.
The speaker distributed a test I had taken before that demonstrated how much multitasking slows down our work.
I am the queen of multitasking...to the point that I get a lot of things done, but nothing finished.
One trick to avoid multitasking: set a timer and work on projects in blocks of time without those pesky time-wasting interruptions.
Great idea!
I started this blog post, set my timer for 30 minutes and went straight to work.
I stopped the timer to go fill my glass with ice water.
Reset.
Typed a few lines and the phone rang.
Unexpected problem I could only partially resolve.
Conversation over.
Reset.
So, this method isn't working so well for me so far.
Each BWM president chooses an inspiring theme that our group uses throughout the year as motivation.
They are always great themes, but President Sharron has chosen a theme that speaks to each of us individually and inspires accountability.
Her theme, "Just One Woman Can," opens up a realm of possibilities.
We often underestimate the difference we can make as individuals.
Being an Alzheimer's volunteer and advocate, I realize that I can make a difference.
You can make a difference too!
One person can... a)      Support Walk to End Alzheimer's.
Can't walk?
You can still help by sponsoring a walker.
Dorothy Ream wasn't able to walk, but she used to call up all her friends and ask them to pledge any amount no matter how small.
She annually raised over $1,000 to support our local walk.
b)     Write a Letter or Send an E-mail.
You can write a letter to your senator or representative on the state and national level to support Alzheimer's research and legislation.
Let them know providing services for families and finding a cure for Alzheimer's is important to you.
Share your story!
Call your local chapter for information on current legislative issues.
c)      "Hug" a Caregiver.
Providing around the clock care for a loved one leaves a person drained and stressed.
The caregiver often needs some TLC too!
Hugs come in many forms, especially random acts of kindness--greeting cards, flowers, casseroles, performing a household chore for the caregiver, or mowing the grass.
d)     Learn the Facts.
You can stay informed by signing up for email updates from the Alzheimer's Association.
Attend educational programs offered by your local chapter.
Ask for brochures or pamphlets to address specific problems.
Be sure to get information from reliable sources.
Knowledge is power when dealing with Alzheimer's disease.
If you think of these suggestions as a To-Do List, you see that it is only a beginning.
These four items are within everyone's reach, but you are the only one that knows what you can do to add to the list.
It is personally rewarding to know that you can make a difference.
I saw a graphic a few days ago of a piece of paper and the only thing written on it was, "Write a To-Do List." I laughed when I saw it, but you do have to begin at the beginning, after all.
Checking off the "done" items is a visual reminder of the power each of us holds within our grasp.
What one person can do is limited only by imagination and motivation.
Copyright (c) April 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 17, 2016>
When I left for the Alzheimer's Forum in D.C., I decided to hide some of my electronics.
There's no use in making life easier for a pesky burglar who might try to make a dime off my personal property.
I suppose if my PC was stolen, I could buy a new one.
More important to me are the external drives that hold my photos and data files.
I took one camera with me and hid the other.
Also, before I travel, I lighten my purse.
There's no point in taking all my credit cards or gift cards.
Heaven forbid that a thief would snatch my purse and abscond with my library card.
If you are going to hide something, even in a house as big as this one, you have to tuck away valuables somewhere other than the usual places: bathroom cabinets, back of underwear drawer, etc.
My bad that I didn't write down the creative hidey-holes I found.
After all, I was going to be gone for nearly a week, and my mind was going to be spinning like a Texas tornado on a sultry summer day.
Sure enough, I spent an action packed time in D.C.
Being around caregivers and persons living with the disease flooded my heart with memories.
The Alzheimer's forum was emotionally draining this year because of the timing.
April 5 was Jim's homecoming from Vietnam.
It was a special day for us, and we always celebrated.
Then, the trip home seemed more grueling than usual.
I really had no complaints other than the plane ride was a little bumpy, and we landed in a forty mile-an-hour wind.
I'm not nervous about flying at all, but I did breathe a small sigh of relief when the plane stopped, and the flight attendant said, "Ta-da!" By the time I picked up my car and drove home, it was bedtime and I was exhausted.
After I caught up on my rest, it was time to gather up my hidden treasures.
I couldn't for the life of me remember where I had hidden my camera.
I kept returning to a place where I thought I'd hidden it, only to come up empty.
As I wandered aimlessly through the house, I saw something that triggered my memory and suddenly knew where it was.
Three days later, I remembered all the cards I'd taken out of my purse.
After a moment of sheer panic, I re-checked the place where I thought I'd hidden my camera, now looking for something smaller.
Whew!
I could mentally check off the last item on my lost and found list.
I couldn't help but think about another April anniversary.
Eleven years ago, we lost Jim.
That loss was so great that even though my mind knew it was coming, my heart wasn't ready.
As time ticks by today, I can't help but think about those last moments of holding Jim's hand, playing his favorite songs, and watching the light go out of his eyes.
In the early morning hours of April 18, he left us.
Anger was the emotion that surprised me the most when Jim died.
I was so angry that this horrible disease happened to him, to us, to our family.
I was furious that he had lost ten years of being Jim before the disease took life itself from him.
I couldn't stay angry forever, and eventually I found peace.
I knew that given the choice, Jim would not have wanted to live the last decade of his life lost in the world of dementia.
He would have much rather have spent the last years of his life strumming his guitar, fishing, playing with our grandkids, and camping out at Moraine Park in the Rocky Mountain National Park.
He would have preferred going out in a blaze of glory.
Jim was lost to this world, but I rediscovered my memories of him.
You might say that I found them.
As for Jim, I believe he found that cabin in the corner of Glory Land he used to sing about, and he walks a well-worn path to his favorite fishing hole.
Copyright (c) April 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 10, 2016>
Kathy Siggins, Linda Fisher, Sarah Harris   I spent most of last week at the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum where every meeting and activity was virtually a sea of purple.
I was joined by 1,199 other determined, and purple clad, advocates at our nation's capital to  continue the fight for Alzheimer's.
The forum runs like a well oiled machine and with this being my sixteenth forum, I knew what to expect.
Mostly, I know to expect the unexpected: the moments that catch me off-guard opening up a forgotten memory; the personal stories; the hopes and fears of new advocates; the complete charm of a lovely woman in the early stages of the disease.
Each year, I meet new people and get to spend time with friends from other parts of the country that I see annually at the forum.
The magical days of the forum are three musketeer time.
My friends Sarah Harris, Kathy Siggins, and I spend as much time together as possible.
It almost seems that we finish conversations we started the year before.
As Sarah said, "In one way it doesn't seem like a year, but in another way it seems much longer." Kathy and I did the tourist attractions Saturday afternoon and Sunday until aching feet drove us  indoors to relax and wait for Sarah's arrival.
Sarah was at a disadvantage this year with her broken ankle, but she managed to keep up with a handy-dandy scooter.
Sarah and I are ambassadors so we started a little early with the ambassador lunch and program.
She and I discovered parts of the hotel we never knew existed.
We made our way around on service elevators that opened into hallways leading to a bevy of unmarked doors.
We soon learned to just keep opening them until we found the meeting room for the next session.
The forum officially began with the roll call of the states.
This year those of us presenting our state's accomplishments entered the room with much fanfare, following a band and waving our state flags.
The National Alzheimer's dinner was special for Missouri Advocates this year for two reasons.
First, Senator Blunt received a humanitarian award for advancing research funding for Alzheimer's.
He made us proud with his impassioned support during his acceptance speech.
The second reason for Missouri Advocates to celebrate was when our own Pat Etienne, along with the Early-Stage Advisory Group, received the Advocate of the Year Award.
Of course, the highlight of the conference is always Capitol Hill day.
Twelve hundred determined people wearing purple sashes draw a lot of attention.
This year, we brought three issues to the attention of our legislators: (1) a request for a $400 million increase in Alzheimer's research, (2) co-sponsors for the HOPE for Alzheimer's Act estimated to save an amazing $692 million over the next ten years and (3) the Palliative Care and Hospice Education and Training Act (PCHETA).
I found out line dancing did not prepare me for the amount of walking required to go from the bus up the hill, back and forth from the Senate offices, where we visited Senators Blunt and McCaskill, to the other side of the Capitol to visit Congresswoman Hartzler's office, and back again for the Senate Hearing.
I was reminded of the Princess and the Pea when I discovered a tiny ridge inside my most comfortable boots after putting several miles on my feet.
Just when I thought I couldn't take another step--it was time to go back to the bus stop.
Alzheimer's is a scary disease, and honestly, I think that most legislators "get it." They know we have to get a handle on this expensive disease or it's going to bankrupt Medicaid and Medicare when we boomers get a few more years on us.
I don't want to spend my declining years not knowing my children and grandchildren.
On the elevator at the Marriott Wardman Park, a lady looked at my purple "Alzheimer's Association" sash and said, "Your group is so impressive.
You are enthusiastic and really make a statement.
Thank you for being here."  I'm glad I could be there, but I'll be even happier when it is no longer necessary!
Copyright (c) April 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 22, 2016>
Several years ago, my sister and I went to the War Eagle Mill Craft Fair and kept seeing different versions of "When My Sister and I Are Old, We Shall Wear Purple." Of course, it goes on to say "with a red hat which doesn't go." Well, I guess that time has come.
She is a member of the Red Hats.
I haven't joined that organization, but when I wore red to Go Red for Women, I carried the purple purse I bought for the Alzheimer's Forum.
Yes, it was a little too much trouble to switch everything for one day, and no, I don't care one whit that purple doesn't go with red.
The combination of colors though, got me to thinking--both colors are symbols of diseases that affect women differently than men.
One thing I've learned from the Go Red events is that women sometimes don't recognize the symptoms of a heart attack.
A woman can have a silent heart attack and not even know it.
She may think she has indigestion, the flu, or that she's strained a muscle.
Instead of her chest hurting, she may have jaw pain or pain in the upper back or arms.
She may just feel tired all the time.
Alzheimer's affects women differently too.
More women are caregivers for a loved one who has Alzheimer's and suffer from depression more than male caregivers.
Female caregivers who work are more likely to have problems with absenteeism and are more likely to quit their job completely.
I was fortunate to have flexible hours and understanding managers and co-workers.
Red meets purple at the junction of the heart/brain connection.
Researchers believe that what is good for the heart is good for the brain.
A heart healthy diet may not only keep your heart in better shape, but could also reduce your risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
Your mother was trying to get you off on the path to health when she insisted that you eat your vegetables.
Nuts, berries, fish high in omega-3, beans, tomatoes, and a small glass of red wine, and can help you eat your way to a healthier heart and brain.
When I wear my red and purple, I won't think about being old enough to throw those odd colors together.
Instead I'll  think about how I can use the combined wisdom of the American Heart Association and the Alzheimer's Association to be a healthier person for the rest of my life.
As far as my personal health goes, I can't think of any two body parts more important to me than my heart and my brain.
A glass of red wine and dark chocolate go a long way toward making life more enjoyable.
If it improves our overall health, well, I'll raise my glass in a toast to healthier, happier women.
Copyright (c) March 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 15, 2016>
Jessica Snell, Rep. Dohrman, Linda Fisher Advocates from the three Missouri Alzheimer's Association Chapters annually converge on our State Capital to take action against the Alzheimer's epidemic.
We come with facts in hand: Alzheimer's is the sixth leading cause of death; 110,000 Missourians have Alzheimer's; 70 percent live at home; 312,000 unpaid caregivers; and the value of unpaid care in Missouri is estimated to be $4.3 billion.
Each year we visit with our legislators about Alzheimer's Grants for Respite.
This year we were asking for $450,000 to be placed in the budget for the Department of Health and Senior Services.
We had sample stories to share about the need for respite, but I shared my own story.
I was working when Jim developed dementia at 49.
Since I wanted to keep him at home as long as possible, I looked into assistance that might be available.
It so happened that since Jim was so young, he did not qualify for the programs in place for seniors.
I turned to the Alzheimer's Association, and they gave me the only help I was able to find--respite funds.
Did these funds cover all the costs?
Not by a long shot.
As a fulltime employee, my needs were above and beyond what this kind of program would cover.
The real beauty of respite is that a caregiver can have some time to him- or herself.
It is common for a caregiver to burn out.
Some of the common side effects of caring for a loved one with dementia include depression, stress, lack of sleep, health problems, and a sense of being overwhelmed.
A primary caregiver has been thrust into a situation beyond the imaginable.
Stacy Tew-Lovasz, president of the St. Louis Chapter, pointed out during the Memory Day Ceremony that women are greatly affected by Alzheimer's.
Women make up more than 60% of the caregivers.
More than two-thirds of those affected with Alzheimer's are women.
I can tell you by experience that after being a primary caregiver, you have a great dread of developing Alzheimer's.
How sad is it that a woman would spend a decade or more being a caregiver and then develop the disease?
When Jessica Snell and I visited with our representatives on Memory Day, we pointed out that the $450,000 could save Missouri taxpayers $2 million.
I know that may seem unlikely to some people, but here is how we arrive at that savings: 800 respite families X $152 average nursing home cost per day X 30 days delay in Nursing Home placement X 60% of Nursing Home residents on Medicare = $2 million savings in Medicaid Nursing Home Care.
Honestly, I think the estimate is on the low side.
Surveys show that 99% of respite recipients said they were able to keep their loved one at home longer.
In-home care allowed me to keep Jim at home for about an additional six months.
No, respite did not pay for all that, but respite reimbursement helped me manage the expense.
Memory Day is a special day for Alzheimer's advocates to share our message with our Missouri representatives and senators.
They need to hear from us so that our respite funds don't get put on the back burner.
One thing you learn in advocacy training is to make the "ask." We were heartened to learn that we had their full support with the magic word, "Yes."  Copyright (c) March 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 10, 2016>
Last week, the downtown location of our church burned to the ground.
The church was built in 1888.
It must have been an exciting day when the cornerstone was laid, most likely with great ceremony.
People mourned the loss of the building that hosted weddings, funerals, baptisms, community gatherings, Christmas programs, and Easter services.
Older members would remember more formal times when Sunday school classes were filled with little girls in frilly dresses and little boys with their hair slicked down wearing uncomfortable shoes.
We are fortunate that First United Methodist Church has a south campus--the Celebration Center, where I go to early church.
Sunday morning, a third service has been added to accommodate the parishioners of the downtown church.
We all know that church is not a building, it is the congregation.
Yet, to see the rubble where a magnificent house of worship once stood brings a special type of sadness.
The cornerstone was one of the few artifacts salvaged from the site.
Besides a physical stone, a cornerstone can be a person of prime importance.
Many families have a cornerstone.
Sometimes they don't even realize who that cornerstone is until something happens to them.
I've seen families fall into disarray when the cornerstone of their family develops Alzheimer's.
Jim was the cornerstone of our family, but we couldn't allow ourselves to collapse when he started to change.
Once we realized Jim's dementia wasn't going to get better, I expected to mourn the big changes.
Over time, I realized the nuances of his personality changes were equally heartbreaking.
I think what I missed the most was our daily routine.
I missed our conversations over morning coffee.
Dozens of little moments throughout the day were out of kilter.
He no longer dropped by work with a single red rose or took my car to the station to put gas in it.
Day's end was different.
For two decades we went to bed early and both of us read our books.
New routines replaced the old.
Conversations became one-sided monologs.
Sometimes, I read to him.
I learned to put gas in my car.
I placed a single red rose next to his urn before they sealed the niche at the Veteran's Cemetery.
Life goes on.
It really is true that you don't know how strong you can be until it's your only choice.
The cornerstone in a building is a prominent, special stone at the intersection of two walls.
The cornerstone from the downtown church was saved and placed in front of the Celebration Center where we placed small stones of remembrance on it.
In a family, the cornerstone is the pivotal person at the heart of the family.
Once that special person is gone, we cherish our memories and  honor our loved one by living life to the fullest.
Copyright (c) March 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 28, 2016>
Lake Honor, College of the Ozarks When I was at the College of the Ozarks, students would drop out of school to "find" themselves.
It's not as if they were lost physically, they just couldn't seem to decide what they really wanted to be when they grew up--if they grew up.
We've all known someone with a big ego and a strong sense of self.
We've met people who seemed self confident one day and uncertain the next.
Then,others who never trusted their own judgment, or believed they were worthless.
They couldn't find their own value and wondered, Who am I?
Fragile egos aside, no matter how much my friends questioned who they were, they always knew their names and backgrounds--real and embellished.
They knew their brothers, sisters, friends, boyfriend or girlfriend.
The only thing they were unsure of was why they were on this earth and what their purpose in life was.
I dropped out of college to pursue my own destiny.
My imagination has always been darned active, but for my life to have been any different is unimaginable.
My life certainly didn't follow the plans my youthful self made for my future, but I wouldn't change any of it.
The road I followed brought me to Jim and the family I cherish and the experiences that made me who I am today.
Don't get me wrong, everything wasn't peachy pie perfect.
We hit some bumps, big and small, along the way.
We made mistakes.
Vietnam changed Jim, dementia changed him even more.
But I don't think Jim lost track of who he was, or who he loved, and who loved him.
Even when he couldn't say the words, his eyes would light up from time to time, and you knew he was there.
Inside.
As the present slipped from his memory, he remembered the past.
Jim grew up in a large itinerant family.
They would pile into a car and head across the state, or country, depending on where they could find work.
Home was where they were at the time--it might be a rental house, a camper trailer, a tent, under a tree, or with relatives.
That kind of life might not be for everyone, but Jim saw it as a series of adventures.
He loved reminiscing about the people he knew, the places he went to school, and the sites he'd seen.
So, when his short-term memory faded, he spent quality time in the glory days of his youth.
He never had to find himself, because his heart was the same.
A lot of things changed as Jim became more dependent on others to provide his personal care.
People often asked me if Jim knew who I was.
He rarely spoke, so he didn't call me by the wrong name.
I do know that one time when I was at the Alzheimer's Forum, someone at the long-term care facility tried to shave him, and Jim pushed the razor away.
"Linda," he said.
His mom got a kick out of that.
She said he didn't want anyone else to shave him because he knew I'd be back to do it.
Jim may not have known who I was all the time, but I always knew him.
I learned to love who he was through each stage of the disease.
When he became more childlike, I knew his roots from the stories he had shared with me.
For those of us who have our short- and long-term memories intact, we shouldn't question who we were.
We should not just be determined to be the best person we can become when we grow up--if we grow up.
Knowing just exactly who we are, our faults and our strong points, could be key to being the best person we can be today.
Copyright (c) February 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 13, 2016>
An Arkansas man with Alzheimer's, eighty-three-year-old Melvyn Amrine, disappeared.
His wife, worried that he was lost, called the police.
When the police found him, Melvyn told them he had always bought his wife flowers for Mother's Day, and he was on his way to the store.
The officers made a stop on the way home for Melvyn to make his purchase.
He came up a little short, but the officers made up the difference.
His wife, Doris, said it almost broke her heart to know that he still loved her.
She said, "It's special, because even though the mind doesn't remember everything, the heart remembers." Although this event happened on Mother's Day, it epitomizes the love we all dream of for Valentine's Day.
There is nothing like having true love to warm your heart any day, but especially on the day dedicated to matters of the heart.
What is love anyway?
Merriam-Webster's first definition is "a feeling of strong or constant affection for a person." Your ability to love is personal.
Early in life, you love a lot of people: parents, children, siblings, cousins, and friends, but most of all, you love yourself.
As a child, you may think you are the center of the universe and everybody revolves around you.
When you don't get your way, "I hate you," may pop out of your mouth with no regard to how hurtful it may be.
As you grow older, you become more interested in the second definition of love, that is, "attraction that includes sexual desire: the strong affection felt by people who have a romantic relationship." Crushes are often mistaken for love.
When love is unrequited, there is a fine line between pursuing your heart and becoming a stalker.
Love hurts when you lose a person you love.
Regardless of how that loss comes about, you can either harden your heart or fill it to the brim with more love.
The real love prize goes to soul mates, or two people who love each other.
Most of us know the Biblical definition of love: "Love is patient, love is kind." A lot of wisdom follows with the verse that says, "It does not dishonor others, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs." When  you are married to someone with Alzheimer's you have a special relationship and a different kind of love.
What had been reciprocal becomes unconditional.
Shared memories become individual.
Much is lost, yet much remains.
Love is shown in non-traditional ways.
Possibilities abound for showing love for a spouse with dementia.
My friend Jane said that her heart overflowed with love for her husband when she combed his hair.
When you truly love someone, you realize that you are not the center of the universe--your loved one is.
Yes, the mind forgets when Alzheimer's attacks the brain.
But never underestimate the power of the heart.
Romance becomes less important, but love is victorious when you place someone else's needs before your own.
Happy Valentine's Day, caregivers.
Yours is the most remarkable love.
Copyright (c) February 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 8, 2016>
Recently, I  joined a line dancing exercise class.
I've pretty much caught on to the electric slide, but have been having a little more trouble with the suds-in-the-bucket dance.
We've practiced the dance a few times in a straight line, but last Friday we danced across from a partner.
"Look at the person beside you, and not the one opposite you," our instructor, Ruth, cautioned us.
I kept getting step-step and step-slide mixed up.
"Just keep moving," Ruth said.
Soon I discovered that even when I missed a step (or two, or three), it wasn't too bad as long as I kept moving.
Eventually, I was where I was supposed to be--when I was supposed to be there.
Sweet success, in a manner of speaking.
So far, I haven't found an area of life where I can't make a mistake.
Sometimes they are doozies.
I've always considered myself to be lucky I wasn't a brain surgeon.
At least none of my errors resulted in someone dying.
Since I've retired, most of my mistakes haven't been in the public eye.
I made several missteps in the last week--locked myself out of my car with my purse, cell phone, and keys inside it, drove off and forgot to shut the garage door, let the dog wrap his leash around the cat's neck...you get the drift?
Mistakes.
We all make them.
Too often, Alzheimer's caregivers believe they shouldn't make mistakes, but caregiving involves unchartered waters.
Whether a professional or a family caregiver, we need to remember every person is different and every day is a new day.
Just because something worked yesterday does not mean it will work today.
Every one of us makes mistakes, but a person with dementia is ultimately the most forgiving person we will ever encounter.
When I lost patience with Jim or didn't make the best decisions, I would remember what I'd  done, or failed to do, much longer than he ever did.
It seemed I was one of those people who had to learn everything the hard way.
Trial and error was my favorite learning tool.
It would have been easier to give up than it was to keep on keeping on, as I liked to think of it.
If we let our mistakes paralyze us, we miss out on so much.
As in dance, when we miss a step in life, we just need to keep moving.
Copyright (c) February 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 1, 2016>
I saw a news article that PETA wants to replace Punxsutawney Phil with a mechanical groundhog.
Call me a traditionalist, but I can't picture a mechanical groundhog heralding the onset of spring.
With Groundhog Day coming up soon, my thoughts have turned to shadows.
Shadows are personal, individual and attached to us for life.
A shadow is mysterious and much more than a patch of shade.
Sometimes a shadow seems to have a life of its own.
I conducted my own un-scientific experiment when I was a child.
I really thought if I moved fast enough, my shadow might not make the same motion.
It does no good to run from your shadow.
It's always right behind you, touching you, taunting you.
We can cast a shadow or have a shadow cast over us.
The biggest shadow in my life was when Jim developed dementia.
Sometimes I felt like burrowing into a hole and hiding from the shadow.
Just like the groundhog, we have to face our real and metaphorical shadows.
When I was younger, I was always confused about how the whole shadow thing worked on Groundhog Day.
Doesn't it seem more logical that if the sun shines it is an indication of better weather?
That's not how it works though.
If the groundhog doesn't see his shadow, spring is right around the corner.
I'll have to admit that I disagree with PETA on a lot of issues, but this one is just over the top.
Let's face it--the job market is limited for groundhogs, and Punxsutawney Phil has the best one of all.
If I were Phil, I'd be mad as blazes that PETA wanted to ruin the cushiest gig known to groundhogs worldwide.
Life might be tough for a lot of groundhogs, but Phil is an exception.
He lives in a heated burrow and only has to show up for work one day a year.
Almost makes you wish you were a groundhog, doesn't it?
All the regular groundhog's hearts must be filled with envy for Phil's so-called unethical treatment.
Maybe PETA should ask the official representative of the Groundhog Club to interview a few of the lowly groundhogs.
Since the groundhog guy understands "groundhogese" he might be able to convey their true opinion of Phil's unethical treatment.
Groundhog Day is steeped in tradition and folklore, and Phil is the groundhog on the most watched list.
Come on, PETA, don't you know the whole country is on edge waiting for Phil's prediction?
Did you know that 90% of the time, the groundhog sees his shadow?
I sure hope Phil doesn't see his shadow this year.
It wouldn't hurt my feelings if ice storms, blizzards, and frozen water pipes are shoved forward to next winter.
There are a few things you don't do in life.
At the top of the list is "Don't mess with groundhogs".
OK, so maybe it isn't at the top of the list, but on February 2, it should be.
Jim used to give a crazy laugh and in a deep voice proclaim: "The Shadow Knows!" One day when I asked him what the heck that was supposed to mean, he explained that "The Shadow Knows" was a radio show he listened to when he was a kid.
Well, just like the old radio program, the shadow knows what the weather will be.
The imposter's shadow would not be the same as Phil's, and Mother Nature would not be amused.
Original Post January  2010 Groundhog Clipart: Copyrighted by Bobbie Peachey http://webclipart.about.com  Copyright (c) February 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 25, 2016>
A few weeks ago my sister and I were discussing weight.
She had been thin most of her life and she used to say to me, "Gaining weight is just as hard for me as losing it is for you." "Maybe so," I admitted, "but it would be a heck of a lot more fun." After she gained weight, she said she felt a lot better, but was hesitant to buy new clothing because her sizes kept changing.
Leggings turned out to be a great choice because they, well, stretched--a lot.
Since I've retired, my wardrobe changed dramatically.
"If I'm not going anywhere, I might just stay in my PJ's all day," I admitted to my sister.
"If I feel like dressing up a bit, I put on sweatpants.
If I'm going somewhere, I'll wear my stretchy jeans."  Recently I bought a pair of Jeggings.
I discovered they had the comfort of leggings, but looked more like jeans.
Ahh.
The best of both worlds.
Being comfortable not only kept me from stressing over every darned holiday pound I gained, it actually prevented surgery.
That's a bold statement, but from someone who developed knee problems over thirty years ago, I stand behind every word.
By 2012, my knees had gotten so bad that I had a cortisone shot before I went on vacation to make sure I wasn't hobbling around.
The shot provided some temporary relief and the possibility of surgery was postponed.
As we went into winter that year, I bought two pair of comfortable boots with low heels.
The boots turned out to be a fortunate purchase because that winter brought weeks and weeks of snow.
After about a month, I noticed that my knees felt better than they had in years.
Wearing the low-heeled, comfortable boots had saved me from surgery.
Why did I go through life wearing uncomfortable shoes, or clothing, because they were fashionable?
Was it vanity, or just what I thought was expected.
After all, I never wore my PJ's to the store, or my sweatpants to a conference.
Even people who always dressed for comfort sometimes have to make adjustments.
Jim was always most comfortable wearing his 501 Levis.
As his dementia advanced, he needed assistance with dressing, and I couldn't quite handle the button fly.
We advanced to zip up jeans, and that worked for a while.
When Jim went into long-term care, it was much easier for him to dress in sweatpants and a Kansas City Chief's T-shirt.
Dressing for comfort had an additional benefit for Jim.
He didn't seem to need much sleep and would walk day and night until he was exhausted enough to sit in a comfortable chair or lie down on a couch to take a nap.
His constant pacing meant he needed comfortable shoes.
I bought him good athletic shoes and had to replace them on a regular basis.
I found out comfort wasn't only important with Jim's clothing.
It extended to holding hands, hugs, and providing companionship.
Comfort was key to Jim's physical and emotional wellbeing.
Yes, I discovered the most important part of Jim's body that needed comfort was his heart.
Copyright (c) January 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 21, 2016>
1) What inspired you to start blogging?
My husband, Jim, developed dementia at 49 years old.
After a series of tests, the doctor told us Jim had dementia of the Alzheimer's type.
That was the beginning of our Alzheimer's journey.
We learned that nothing would slow down the progression of the disease and that it was 100% fatal.
Jim died in 2005, ten years after the diagnosis.
Writing was part of my healing process after Jim passed away.
Originally, I intended to write a memoir based on my tape-recorded journal, but opted to share my experiences through a blog instead.
A blog is an ongoing interaction that breathes life into the stories and experiences of being a caregiver.
My goals are to encourage, inspire, and inform.
Early Onset Alzheimer's blog reflects my desire to live life to the fullest and to find humor in everyday life.
2) What would you do with the money if you won?
I would use the money to help pay expenses to the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum in Washington, D.C. in April.
I'm already registered for the 2016 Forum--my sixteenth consecutive trip to advocate for Alzheimer's research and programs to help care partners cope.
Each year, I join hundreds of other advocates as we don our purple "beauty queen" sashes and storm Capitol Hill.
3) What has been your best blogging moment?
Since I began Early Onset Alzheimer's blog in 2008, my best blogging moment(s) are when someone tells me they learned something helpful or found encouragement from one of my posts.
I think my most thrilling moment was when the national Alzheimer's Association featured a story about Jim and me in their online newsletter with a link to my blog.
That was the first time that more than 100 people visited my blog in one day.
After I first entered Healthline's contest  in 2012,  my blog has averaged more than  100 daily views and at times as many as 500 visitors in one day.
This inspires me to keep on blogging.
Thank you, Healthline, for giving us bloggers this excellent opportunity to reach a wider audience.
Note: Early Onset Alzheimer's blog won 2nd in Healthline's Best Health Blog Contest.
Copyright (c) January 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 20, 2016>
"No matter how lost you are, music can bring you home." ~ Unattributed Music touches our souls and brings back memories.
Jim called playing his guitar therapy.
And it was.
He kept the guitar on a stand in our kitchen.
Each morning he picked it up, looked out the window at his mother's house, the road, and cattle in the pasture, then played a few tunes.
He'd drink a cup of hot coffee--no lukewarm stuff for him--and sing whatever country or cowboy song was on his mind, or heart, that morning.
From the time he was a boy and learned how to play the mandolin, the only instrument his tiny fingers could reach, until the day he died, music was in his soul.
One of the saddest parts of dementia was watching Jim lose his ability to play his guitar and sing his songs.
To this day when I hear one of his favorite songs, memories of Jim, sitting in the kitchen strumming his guitar, soothes my soul.
Early Onset Alzheimer's blog is a tribute to Jim, our journey, and a way to reach out to others who know the heartbreaking loss of dementia.
Healthline's contest is nearing an end.
The final tally will come in a few days, but I want you to know that we are already winners.
Whether we win the top prize, or not, we've made our voices heard all over the Internet.
Spread the word, Alzheimer's is a priority to us, and we want to end it NOW.
Copyright (c) January 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 18, 2016>
We writers often refer to our "work in progress" or WIP for short.
When we speak these words, often in a self-depreciating way, we are referring to our current project.
I've often said my attention span is too short to write a novel.
Oh, I've started a few all right, even completed a draft of a mystery novel, but according to writing experts my WIP has a major flaw--the heroine turns out to be a villain.
I don't believe a story should be predictable.
I watched a movie this afternoon and within the first ten minutes I knew how the story was going to end.
Of course, it took two hours before it got there, but it ended just as I knew it would.
After all, it was a Hallmark movie and people have expectations.
They want the movie to end with a sigh of contentment, not with a "I sure didn't see that coming" response.
Real life isn't anything like the movies with the predictable happy ending.
It isn't even like a well-written book that ties up all the loose ends.
Life is unpredictable and more like looking into a kaleidoscope with ever-changing patterns.
When we're young, we all have expectations as to what we want to be when we grow up.
It was hard for me to accept that being a princess wasn't going to happen.
After the reality of adulthood sets in, we still have things we want to do, places we want to see, and goals we want to reach.
Some of us have a bucket list.
It may not be written down.
It may reside merely as a niggling sense of incompleteness in our lives.
Unfinished business.
Life happens and plans change.
Then change again.
As we age, things either come together or they fall apart.
Or both.
Everything might be perking along without a single issue, and then life slaps us in the face or bonks us on the head.
The defining moment of change in my life was when Jim developed dementia.
We had plans that didn't include life as we knew it coming to a screeching halt.
We had retirement dreams that involved travel flush with mountain time, southwest desert time, and, knowing Jim, long drives revisiting his childhood places.
I never had a chance to see the bridge they lived under in Texas where Lyndon Johnson visited them, lending a helping hand.
Our dreams were sabotaged by a rare type of younger onset dementia.
Jim changed from the decisive, intelligent, jokester, master musician, and loving, warm man he had been into a person dependent on others for his most basic care.
Being a primary caregiver is on-the-job training for a job no one wants.
It isn't that we don't want to take care of our loved ones, it's that we would give anything if the circumstances did not exist.
We wish we could rewrite life's story.
Edit out the hurt and pain.
Replace hard times with good times.
Create that happy ending.
Dementia brings a life fraught with adversity: sadness, unfathomable challenges, and sometimes full blown anger at a disease that is robbing us of a person we love.
Adversity is a two-sided mirror.
If we look at life's challenges one way, we see defeat.
If we look at adversity another way, we see strength.
Most of us will dig deep and find strength we never even suspected we had.
Odd as it may seem, adversity determines what we become.
It is what gives us the passion to adopt a mission in life.
Alzheimer's wasn't even on my radar, but taking up the purple banner has defined who I am.
It has made me the person I am today--an advocate, Alzheimer's volunteer, and blogger.
Writing has always been as important to me as breathing.
The first time I put pen to paper was to write a story about a pet pig in elementary school.
No one would want me to suffocate beneath the weight of an unfinished novel, my work without progress.
I should have written it until "The End" was at the bottom of the last page, but I didn't.
On the other hand, a blog is an endless work in progress, just like I am.
A match made in blog heaven.
Copyright (c) January 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 12, 2016>
I became a volunteer for the Alzheimer's Association because of the support they gave to me when I needed it.
I have been known to refer to myself as the Alzheimer's poster child.
My first contact with the local Alzheimer's Association Chapter was in the form of a desperate call to their "Help" line before we even had a diagnosis.
"I don't know if you can help me because we don't know what's causing my husband's problems," I said.
Penney Braun, the executive director, was the person who answered the phone that day.
She assured me that I had called the right place.
My relationship with the Greater Missouri Chapter began with a friendly, concerned voice on the phone and it continues to this day.
Thinking back, I know there's no way to remember everything the Chapter did for me, but I'd like to mention a few of them.
During the Early Stages: They provided caregiving training.
I was starting with zero knowledge about dementia.
I attended several training programs including one for nursing home staff.
I learned important tips about managing behavior, providing personal care, how to reduce stress (both mine and his), and how to provide the correct amount of assistance.
We learned how important it was to get our legal affairs in order.
During the Middle Stages: The Alzheimer's Association helped me by providing respite care.
I was in my forties and quitting my job was not an option.
Because we were young, we did not qualify for senior services that would have helped us.
Through support group, I learned what to look for in a nursing home and that it was a good idea to get Jim's name on a waiting list.
When I realized a home cost more than I earned, I learned about division of assets.
During the Late Stages: My friends at the Chapter office were there to support me when I had to put Jim in a home.
They gave me advice when he went through a failure to thrive and had trouble swallowing.
Throughout the years of dementia, my concern was that the disease could be hereditary.
We had gone through such a long process to get any kind of diagnosis and still were not certain what he had.
Once again, the Alzheimer's Association Chapter staff came through for me.
They made all the arrangements for a brain autopsy after his death.
They went above and beyond by applying for a scholarship on our behalf to pay for it.
Through it all, the Chapter was by my side.
Several members of the staff came from Columbia for Jim's services.
They were there for me from the beginning to the end...and beyond.
Coping with the aftermath of a decade of being a primary caregiver for a loved one with a degenerative brain disease leaves a special kind of emptiness.
My entire routine was different, my purpose was gone.
I've found new purpose, and you might even call me a woman on a mission.
I want to do everything in my power to end this disease.
As an advocate, I make my trips to Washington, D.C., and to Jefferson City to help make this a better world for those with Alzheimer's until it becomes a world without Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) January 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 5, 2016>
On Sunday morning, Pastor Jim told us about a NASA study to test creativity.
A group of five-year-old children were given the same test devised for NASA to help them in finding creative engineers and scientists.
The little children tested at 98%.
Retested at the age of ten, scores were at 30%.
At fifteen, their scores plummeted to 12%.
The same test was given to adults, who scored a measly 2%.
Between the ages of childhood and adulthood, an unlearning process had stripped the test subjects of their innate creativity.
Children use their imaginations until adults interfere.
My granddaughter's kindergarten teacher labeled her "immature" because she liked to pretend she was a puppy.
Immature in kindergarten?
I would hope so!
So we know that if we do nothing to fire our imagination, we unlearn creativity.
This made me think about what my mom said one day about Jim.
She said, "He's unlearning." When you ask most people about Alzheimer's the first thing they think of is memory loss.
Memory loss is only the beginning.
People with dementia unlearn.
Skills and talents learned throughout a lifetime are steadily, progressively unlearned.
Jim unlearned how to tie his shoes.
I bought him shoes with Velcro.
Then he      forgot how to choose his clothes each day.
I laid them out each morning.
We      worked through other problems: he unlearned how to button his 501 Levis, how      to put his belt through the loops, or that buttons should line up with the      buttonholes.
Jim unlearned how to have a conversation.
He couldn't tell his tall tales      anymore.
Then he couldn't remember the names of objects or even names of      close friends and relatives.
Our long conversations ended, and we spent      our days in silence.
He unlearned how to play his guitar and couldn't remember lyrics to songs he'd      known practically his entire life.
I think this was the hardest part for      both of us.
His music had always been a big part of his life, and it      gradually faded away to nothing.
At the end, he forgot how to feed himself.
He forgot how to swallow liquids without      choking.
He forgot how to walk.
He'd unlearned a lifetime of learning.
Of all the things he unlearned, he didn't forget love.
He may have lost the intricacies: the sweet words, the thoughtful gestures, delivering the single rose he bought at the gas station to me at work.
I missed a hundred little things that made Jim, Jim.
The unlearning part of Alzheimer's unravels life as it was, and we are left with what undeniably is.
Then, our choices are clear.
Accept your loved one for the person he or she has become, or grieve for what was and what will never be.
Grief is a normal caregiver emotion, and how we handle grief is as individual as each person.
Coping with grief should be a priority.
We cannot be the kind of caregiver we want to be without taking care of ourselves mentally and emotionally.
I've talked to many caregivers who walked through the darkness of dementia and faced their new reality head on.
Those who go on to live a full life share the common threads of optimism and a sense of humor.
They find creative ways to displace the darkness of dementia with a bright and shining light of laughter and unconditional love.
Copyright (c) January 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 2, 2016>
For several months, I've been working on organizing some of my old photos.
I have thousands of photos in boxes, albums, and my special red external drive.
Each origin has different photos.
This morning I added a new group to the mix when I downloaded photos from a cousin's online album of old family photos.
Organizing my photos began with the ones stored on the external drive, but since I'm easily distracted, I've worked on sorting the Facebook photos.
I've taken pictures on my phone, uploaded from my camera, scanned old photographs, and shared other photos that my family and friends have uploaded.
All these photos were jumbled together in my timeline.
I had started a few "albums" but mostly a photo of my granddaughter's track meet might be next to a picture of a pumpkin.
No order.
Whatsoever.
One of the first rules of order was to gather together some of Jim's photos into one album.
Every time I wanted to post a photo of him, I was searching here and there for it.
I don't know how many times I scanned his army photo to send it in for the Sedalia Democrat's Veteran's Day insert.
I posted photos of Jim in his youth, in Vietnam, on vacations, and even on trips to conventions.
What I could not bring myself to post were pictures of him when dementia changed his looks.
Late in the disease, Jim became gaunt, he kept his head in a thrown back position, his expressions--well, were different.
I continued to love him with all my heart and wanted to do anything I could to make his life better.
Making it better often started with a kiss, just like making a child's "owie" better.
Only, it never got better.
I became an advocate because I so desperately wanted a cure for this awful disease.
Even when his neurologist who had him entered into a research program told me, "You know, if a cure comes now, it will be too late for Jim." At that point, his brain was shrinking, the synapses were misfiring, and life had become a struggle for him.
For me.
For his mom.
For our children.
For everyone who loved him.
During those ten years of dementia, we learned to live a new norm.
We found moments to enjoy, time to laugh, and wrapped it all in love.
We found a way to live until his life was gone.
Now, I cherish the memories that made Jim the man I chose to share my life with and to father my children.
During the early years of our marriage, we went through rough financial times when we struggled to pay the bills.
Sometimes we had disagreements, or outright verbal warfare.
But through it all, there was never the slightest doubt that we would work it out and that love trumped adversity and controversy.
He always had my back, and I had his.
When he changed, I missed his fierce loyalty and the way he spoiled me.
He never called me by name.
He always called me by a term of endearment: "honey," "sweetheart," "princess." The closest he came to calling me by name was "Lindarella,"--a play on the song "Cinderella" that he sang especially for me.
Photos and videos bring him back to life--the way he was.
Yes, I'll keep the photos of him late in the disease, and I may even share a few.
Others will remain private.
Memories are a way to enrich the present, not hijack it.
Looking through my album called "Old Family Photos" I realized how blessed I am to have these photos to remind me of the love I've received and given.
Old photos make me smile.
My heart overflows with good fortune and the blessing of enduring love.
Copyright (c) January 2016 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, December 31, 2015>
Simon and Garfunkel's song "The Sounds of Silence" always touched me.
When I heard the cover performed by Disturbed, it made me hear the lyrics in a different context--a more urgent one.
The same words performed in a different manner brought a new dimension to the song and made me pay attention to parts of it that just blended into the background before.
The haunting lyrics of "The Sounds of Silence" make me think of how Jim's voice was silenced with aphasia during his years with dementia.
His problems began with just a few jumbled words until his voice was stilled except for an occasional word.
When a spoken word broke through the boundary of silence, it was as treasured as a rare jewel.
Mostly, Jim learned to talk without speaking, without words.
His mannerisms became the clues that told us of his needs.
His eyes communicated his pleasure, pain, joy, confusion, and a myriad of emotions.
Jim always said he knew me better than I knew myself, and I believe that was the key to our communication.
Instinctively, he knew how to get his point across.
Communicating with a loved one who has Alzheimer's requires some thought.
When you consider that only about 7% of communication is from words, it opens many possibilities.
1.
Speak in simple, straight-forward sentences and give only one instruction at a time.
If I ever asked Jim to do two things in one sentence, he only reacted to the second request.
2.
Patience is your friend!
Allow time for a response.
Don't expect a quick response, or even an appropriate one.
3.
Use body language to get your point across.
Your loved one will understand tone of voice and body language long beyond the time when they understand your words.
Point, demonstrate, or use props.
Also, watch your loved one's body language.
Restlessness, irritability, and other physical symptoms will alert you to their distress.
4.
Validate the emotions you see and hear.
Their reaction to something might be completely different from yours, or even what you would expect theirs to be.
They may re-live grief over and over, or may not acknowledge there is anything to grieve even when a close relative dies.
Throughout life, we communicate--from a baby's cry, parenting, learning in school, to our last profound words.
Life is more complicated and confusing when we lose our lifelong ability to communicate effectively.
Communication isn't easy when your loved one has dementia, but putting in the effort to keep the lines of communication open will help your loved one and you maintain a happier relationship.
Loving words, hugs, and smiles will convey your deepest feelings.
When you listen with your heart, the sounds of silence will tell you everything you need to know.
Copyright (c) December 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 28, 2015>
At our family celebration, the day after Christmas, my grandson opened his Star Wars Lego's.
He is fascinated with all things Star Wars.
"Has he seen the new Star Wars movie," I asked his dad.
"No, he hasn't," Rob replied.
I mentioned a photo posted on Facebook showing people lined up in front of a movie theater to see the original Star Wars in 1977.
The caption read, "Your grandparents lined up to see the first Star Wars." "I remember when your dad and I took you and Eric to see Star Wars.
We went to the drive-in to see it and you both fell asleep." Of course, drive-in movies didn't start until after dark and five- and seven-year-olds were up past their bedtimes.
So, Jim and I were the only ones to see the entire movie.
"I don't even remember it," Rob said.
He didn't remember getting the toys for Christmas either: R2D2 and C3PO.
Of course, at the time, we thought there would only be one Star Wars movie.
Instead, it was the series of movies that just kept on giving, and in 2015 gave again.
What I didn't know was that due to the prequels, the original Star Wars movie's name was changed to Star Wars Episode IV A New Hope.
It seems odd that an original movie in a series would be renamed, "A new hope." I find that intriguing for life as well.
We all face so much adversity just living from day to day that we could use a little bit of "new" hope to keep us going.
When dealing with  Alzheimer's, we may have years of sorrow, months of endurance, weeks of despair, and days of joy, but through it all, we never give up hope.
With Alzheimer's, hope may be just hoping for a good day, hoping that the family pulls together, hope that there is something way better than this world.
Hope for a miracle burrows deep within our hearts that the cure will be discovered in time to save our loved ones.
Now, we have a new hope.
We have hope that this disease will be stamped out in our lifetime.
Finally, our nation is pulling together to fund research in an unprecedented amount.
We have declared war on Alzheimer's.
On December 22, Harry Johns, CEO of the Alzheimer's Association, said, "As we celebrate this momentum for our cause, we are, of course, deeply appreciative of our champions in Congress, members from both parties, who have made the advances we need much more likely with the historic funding increase announced last week.
They have provided unprecedented leadership that will ultimately make a difference in millions and millions of lives." I'll be making my sixteenth consecutive trip to the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum in April to help celebrate this new hope.
Yes, an increase in funding is a great victory but our work isn't done, and it won't be, until Alzheimer's is a curable disease.
A cure has been my hope for many, many years.
My new hope is that someday I'll go to D.C. and won't have anything on my agenda except sight-seeing.
Until then, I'll wear my purple sash and continue to fight the war against Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) December 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 23, 2015>
Yesterday, I met the un-merriest checker ever at Walmart in Columbia.
The light was lit that indicated the lane was open, so Harold and I put our items on the belt.
We could see the checker, who was supposed to be on duty, deep in conversation with another woman.
Finally, she spotted us as we patiently waited for someone to ring up our purchases.
She sauntered over, not saying a word or even giving a hint of a smile, and picked up the items, one by one, scanning.
The total came up, she glared and nodded toward the credit card machine.
I scanned the card, and she handed me the receipt.
Then, she begrudgingly murmured "Thank you," beneath her breath.
Anyway, she said something that ended in "you." I wouldn't a hundred percent swear the first word was "thank." "Wow!
She was rude," I said just as soon as I was out of earshot.
Yes, maybe I should have challenged her to her face, but I'm not passive-aggressive so I didn't say it loud enough for her to overhear.
I know she had a voice because we interrupted her conversation.
I don't know what her problem was.
She certainly wouldn't be in contention for employee of the month.
It was disconcerting to see someone act that way in a retail business offers a high level of customer service, but some people just don't do holidays well.
People who have suffered a tragedy at Christmas time often endure rather than enjoy.
Holiday cheer and noise don't bode well for people with dementia.
A lot of  holiday chaos can send a person with Alzheimer's into a tailspin.
Just a few suggestions to make the holidays easier if you have a loved one with dementia: 1.
Keep the celebrations simple.
It is much better to have an intimate dinner than a huge family gathering.
If it's too hard for you to host the holiday celebration, ask someone else to host it.
2.
Be kind to yourself!
If it's too much to maintain all the traditions of holidays past, choose the ones that mean the most.
Especially, if they are ones you can let your loved one share with you.
Can your loved one ice the Christmas cookies?
3.
Take time for yourself.
Find a few moments to indulge yourself.
You could go to a Christmas program, schedule a relaxing massage, or go to a movie with a friend.
The person who can make your Christmas merry is you.
Everyone else can jump through hoops trying to make it happen, but merriness doesn't come from Walmart, it comes from the heart.
You will find those who give you the gift of friendship, kindness, and love will help bring joy to your holiday.
Don't let anyone steal your joy or cast guilt on you for not being able to do all that you did in the past.
Fill the holidays with peace.
If you happen to go into the Columbia Walmart see a checker with a scowl on her face and a Grinch in her heart, tell her I said, "Merry Christmas!" She probably needs all the encouragement and cheer she can get.
Copyright (c) December 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 16, 2015>
My Mom 2015--Aging Well Have you ever noticed that some people seem old before their time?
The reason some appear to be elderly could be due to physical appearance--they have wrinkles, shuffle when they walk--or more obviously they have turned into a grumpy old person.
Then, there is my mom.
She will be 89 next month but has apparently been dipping her toes in the fountain of youth.
She is healthy, active, and beautiful.
Attitude is a key factor in whether your twilight years are enjoyable and fruitful or just an excuse to check out from life early.
You see people struggle with the concept of retirement.
It takes less effort and risk to keep on working.
It isn't always people who need the money either--they are afraid of not having enough to do or tie their self-worth to their career.
I took early retirement.
I loved my job and had worked hard to succeed, but deep inside, I knew it was "time." I was ready to turn the page on a new chapter--or perhaps open a new book.
I faced retirement with excitement and without any regrets.
Recently, after exchanging pleasantries, a Walmart checker said she was glad her day was almost over and she could go home.
"I have to work another five years before I can retire.
That is if my health holds out." I swiped my credit card and said, "My doctor said she was glad I retired while I was in good health and could enjoy it.
She sees so many people wait until they can't work anymore."  Retirement has been kind to me.
I love waking up when I want to--at least most of the time.
I choose the path to walk most days, or the comfy chair to sit in and read a book, or the TV show to watch, or the social event to attend.
Oh, sometimes living with a farmer means getting dragged into all kinds of projects.
Guess that counts as physical exercise and saves on a gym membership.
In order to live, you must embrace life.
If you live everyday letting other people bring you down, you find yourself marking time, instead of making the most of it.
Each day is a blessing.
We never know what tomorrow or the next hour might bring.
We choose to live, or we choose to endure a living death.
As we age, we are prone to developing medical conditions.
Some of these can be brought on by lifestyle, genetics, environment, or a combination of all three.
Alzheimer's is one of the most dreaded conditions for the elderly.
It is not a normal part of aging, but aging is the number one risk factor.
Researchers found a link between being negative about old age and developing Alzheimer's disease.
The Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging conducted a thirty-year study on aging.
Later in the study, they used scans to track the size of the participants' hippocampus which is primarily associated with memory and spatial navigation.
The people who began the study with a negative outlook on aging had greater size reduction of the hippocampus than their more positive counterparts.
Autopsies found negative people had significantly more plaques and tangles, the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease.
That's good news for those of us who see the up-side of aging.
We look forward to doing our own thing and taking advantage of those senior discounts.
Who would have ever thought attitude could be so darned healthy?
It helps to put setbacks and failures in perspective.
One thing is sure in life--even during the darkest hours, a lot of people in this world are facing greater hardships than I have ever known.
Hey, life is hard.
It can be a lot harder for some than others, but giving up is not an option.
It is heartening to see people who rise above adversity and take control of their own destiny.
It's all about attitude.
You're only as old as your attitude lets you be.
If you don't believe me, talk to my mom!
Copyright (c) December 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 9, 2015>
I checked my Post Office box a few days ago and was pleasantly surprised to see two handwritten missives.
In today's atmosphere of mass mailings, junk mail, advertisements, and "or current occupant" mailings, it is almost mind-boggling to get one handwritten note, much less  an entire letter.
The first note was from one of our Walk to End Alzheimer's sponsors.
Jessica Snell and I had recently delivered T-shirts and a copy of Broken Road: Navigating the Alzheimer's Labyrinth, a publication of my 2014 Early Onset Alzheimer's blog posts.
After thanking us for the shirts, she wrote, "It's our pleasure to support this effort.
I have forwarded your book to our social workers and case managers because I thought they would find it insightful." The other note was from a gentleman who began with "I have Alzheimer's, and I read your book."  He didn't mention which book he read.
In addition to the first book I compiled and edited, Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love, I have seven other Alzheimer's books from my blog.
"My wife said I have quit talking and reading.
Today I read your entire book and I will read the Bible for two years." He went on to talk about his coconut oil regimen.
He said that one of the things I did not mention in my book is coconut oil and its benefits for Alzheimer's.
He is not the first person to ask why I haven't talked about the benefits of coconut oil.
This is one alternative treatment I never tried on Jim, so I have no personal experience to share.
There is little scientific research on coconut oil and Alzheimer's disease.
A trial was supposed to be completed in September of this year, but for some reason it has been delayed and the results are not yet available.
So, basically the jury is still out on the benefits, or a possible downside, of coconut oil therapy.
Coconut oil has its staunch supporters and anecdotal testimony.
Some testimonials say their loved ones showed immediate improvement after taking daily doses of coconut oil for a short time.
Coconut oil contains more MCT (medium chain triglycerides) than any other food.
MCT produces ketones, which some researchers believe can improve Alzheimer's symptoms.
Some very small studies showed improved cognitive function from MCT supplements.
These studies used a supplement, not coconut oil.
A cautionary tale is that the safety of coconut oil in medicinal amounts is unknown.
Its effect on cholesterol levels in high dosages is in dispute.
Another consideration is that just because something is "natural" doesn't mean it is safe when taken in abnormal amounts.
I know the frustration of waiting for an effective treatment for Alzheimer's and I, too, used vitamin E supplements for Jim.
I did clear the dosage with his physician and told every specialist he saw that he was taking it.
None saw it as a problem.
I also take a couple of supplements--CoQ10 and MegaRed for joint problems.
My physician knows I take these, and I've seen tremendous benefits from taking both.
I took different levels until I found the lowest dosage that provided the best results.
They don't work for everyone, but I have confidence this regimen works for me.
Perhaps, it is the same with coconut oil.
It may not work for everyone, but it may work for others.
I do know primary caregivers will see even subtle changes in a loved one with dementia.
We want the highest quality of life without causing any harm.
Once the larger studies are completed, science may come down on one side or the other in the coconut oil question.
In the meantime, I would urge caution and consultation with a trusted medical professional before beginning any alternative treatment.
December 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 29, 2015>
When it rains, pours, day after day, you begin to think that the earth is turning to water.
All I can see from my window is rain in the yard, the fields, and every other low spot in between.
The skies are a hundred shades of gray.
It's hard to let my sunny disposition shine when Mother Nature doesn't cooperate.
I have found myself thinking too much and doing too little.
I've vegged out on the couch two days straight.
I watched show after show.
My listless, do-nothing self became my dominant trait.
It's the rain's fault.
The fall decorations were clustered together waiting for me to get up the energy to put them away.
I dragged out a few of my snowmen, one of my small trees, and other Christmas odds and ends.
But the bulk of the decorations are in the garage in storage tubs.
Then, I turned on the tree and flipped on the TV to watch a Hallmark Christmas show.
About ten minutes in, I realized I'd already seen it.
I went to bed and read until about midnight.
I've had trouble sleeping since it started raining.
The thinker keeps on thinking, and my normal slumber-inducing methods aren't working.
For two days, the negative past swooped down on me and washed away the positive thoughts like so much driftwood.
I woke up this morning out of sorts.
Testy and grumpy.
At least I found the energy to tackle a few tasks.
As I sat down to write my blog post, I noticed a message on Google Plus.
I called my mom to share what was written.
A person on the other side of the globe wrote to comment on my special Mom after reading "Under Control" in Chicken Soup for the Soul Thanks To My Mom.
The note said, "I was very impressed with your mother's unconditional love for you and for Jim when she tirelessly took care of him.
She was still mothering you despite the fact that you have become a mother yourself.
Mothering is not something perfect women do, it is something that perfects women.
If she is still alive, please convey my greetings to her and tell her that someone across the globe is very proud of her." Happily, I responded that my mom was in excellent health and would be turning 89 in January.
I had originally titled the story "Spicy Chicken Sandwich," but the editors at Chicken Soup renamed it, which is probably why they have bestsellers and I don't.
It is always awesome to be in a Chicken Soup book.
The competition is fierce.
This story didn't make it so much on my writing merit as it did the story itself.
A story of how my family became my support system when I was a caregiver.
They put up with me on sunny days and rainy days to help me keep Jim at home as long as possible.
In "Under Control," I focused on my mom, because you can only say so much in 1200 words.
The story could have been about Jim's mom, my kids, my sisters (in-law and birth), cousins, friends, neighbors, and eventually professional caregivers.
Caregivers have a lot of rainy days.
It seems that down days come in clusters.
Rain, and bad days, may seem like they are going to last forty days and forty nights.
Just about the time you think you should get started on that Ark, the rainbow brings the promise that everything is going to be all right.
Next thing you know, the sun pops through and dares those dark clouds to show their frowning gray faces.
Yep.
It's still raining here in Missouri, but I've passed through the gloom and doom.
I'm ready to tackle the world--tomorrow.
Copyright (c) November 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 25, 2015>
Volunteer Pumpkin Still dressed in my PJ's and first cup of coffee in hand, I headed toward my downstairs office yesterday morning.
Harold had already forewarned me that as soon as the weather was warm enough we would return to painting fence posts and rails.
I was determined to get an early start on my blog.
I sat in front of my PC trying to decide if I dare jump into writing my blog post, or if I should tackle my To-Do list first.
I balanced the options in my head.
If I worked on my To-Do list, I would be jumping from task to task spinning my figurative wheels in an attempt to multitask my multitasks.
Hours would fly past while I whittled down my list only to add more.
The list has a life of its own and is never ending.
Blog--a firm decision.
I should have done it Friday, and here it was Tuesday so I was already four days behind.
My quandary helped me decide on the title: "Welcome to My World."  I placed my fingers on the keyboard and noticed my nail polish was worn and chipped.
I would have done them Monday before the Alzheimer's Board meeting, but the power was out when it was time to get ready and still out when I should have been done.
Just as I had thrown everything in the car to go to the other house to shower, the power came back on.
I typed the title, and my phone sounded an alarm.
Ignore it, my left brain said.
Better look at it, my right brain replied.
Curiosity won.
Hair appointment: 10 a.m. What?
Well, that's just dandy.
Here it is 9:30, and I have to be dressed and in town in thirty minutes.
I abandoned my first cup of coffee and ran up the stairs knowing I'd need to be dressed in record time.
Short of breath, I rushed into Harold's office to tell him the good news.
I threw on clothes and a little makeup.
No need fussing with my hair--that's my hairdresser's job.
No need for earrings--they would just get in the way.
After getting my hair cut and styled, I made a quick trip to the grocery store.
As I put the groceries in the car, I saw the box of sponsor T-shirts in the backseat.
It was a perfect day to deliver them, but too warm to leave groceries in the car.
Besides, it was time to get home and paint.
At least my hair looked great until I put on the paint mask and pulled the elastic to the back of my head.
So, seriously, welcome to my world.
But then again, I think it's everyone's world now.
I don't hold the patent on crazy, busy days.
Looking back on my life, it seems it has always been that way.
When my kids were little, days blurred into weeks, into months, and years until they weren't little anymore.
Then, Jim became more dependent on me to provide his essential care.
I became immersed in caring for him and added volunteering for the Alzheimer's Association to the To-Do list.
As if working, being a caregiver, and volunteer work wasn't enough, I went back to college.
How did I do it?
I have no clue.
I just took it a day at a time.
Heck, sometimes it was minute to minute.
I wonder how any of us do it.
Do we take on more than humanly possible, or are we just making the most of the time we have allotted to us?
Are we doing the things we love, or are we fulfilling obligations and pushing aside what we really want to do?
The bottom line is that it's all about balance.
I don't want to be the kind of person that blows off obligations, but I don't want to be the kind of person that only has time for obligations.
I don't mind standing in the freezing cold to ring the bell for Salvation Army any more than sitting in the comfort of my home writing a press release for scholarships.
Variety is as important as balance.
This is how I've chosen to live, so I'm sharing, not complaining.
I've been blessed in so many ways and am thankful for the world I've been given.
I appreciate life's special surprises, like the imperfect, but determined, volunteer pumpkin that grew in our yard this year.
With a smile, I welcome you to my world.
Copyright (c) November 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 14, 2015>
Linda Fisher and Janna Worsham at Coffee with Congress The month of November is a month of pumpkins, fall decor, thanksgiving, and the onslaught of the Christmas season.
It is also Alzheimer's Awareness Month.
I recently attended a "Coffee with Congress" at Provision Living Center in Columbia.
I consider this as a "kickoff" to Alzheimer's Awareness month.
It probably should have been called Coffee with Congress(ional) staff.
Newbies to advocacy often become irate when they think they are going to talk to a member of Congress and instead talk to a staff member.
I've seen perfectly capable advocates waste an opportunity to wholeheartedly share their message.
Staff members are focused on what you have to say and they will share the relevant information with their boss.
In this instance, we met with three staff members.
I had a great visit with Janna Worsham with Congresswoman Vicky Hartzler's office, Sarah Barfield Graff with Senator Roy Blunt's office, and Kyle Klemp with Senator Claire McCaskill's office.
We talked about funding for Alzheimer's research and thanked them for their support.
We are proud of our Missouri group.
Senator Blunt has requested $350 million additional funds for Alzheimer's research.
That is $50 million more than our ask.
Senator McCaskill is the top ranking democrat on the special committee on aging.
We saw her in action at the Alzheimer's Public policy forum when she joined Chairman Susan Collins (R-Maine) to head a bipartisan hearing focusing on the financial, economic, and emotional challenges facing those with Alzheimer's disease and their families.
In addition, I wanted to thank Congresswoman Vicky Hartzler for her unwavering support for Alzheimer's research.
One year when we brought a letter asking for a modest increase in Alzheimer's research, she had already sent a request for $1 billion.
She also uses Facebook, Twitter, and her newsletter to create her own storm of Alzheimer's awareness.
She and I connect on a personal level because we know the heartbreak of losing a loved one to dementia.
We also discussed the HOPE for Alzheimer's Act and the asset the Act would be for families dealing with the disease.
The Act is a common sense approach to providing Medicare coverage for comprehensive care planning services for newly diagnosed individuals and his or her caregiver, ensure that a diagnosis and care planning are included in medical records, and to require the Department of Health and Human Services to educate providers about the benefits.
As a caregiver, I kept track of Jim's medical conditions--symptoms, diagnosis, tests run, side effects of prescription medications, and any information relative to his health.
I took prints of the spreadsheet to every appointment.
This kept him from being prescribed medications that he couldn't take, duplication of tests, and helped me fill out all those darned forms.
What happens to the people who don't have someone to tell every specialist what others have done?
The HOPE Act doesn't have a "Score" which is an indication of what it would cost the government.
Somehow, I think that instead of a cost to the government, it would save patients and the government by reducing duplication of services or writing prescriptions for medicine that has already created problems.
We heard caregiver stories including a care partner who was there with his lovely wife.
He told of their problems with getting a diagnosis of early-onset Alzheimer's.
I shared some of my caregiving experiences.
Several Greater Missouri Chapter staff and Board members were present to tell their stories and share their passion.
The meeting was informative, encouraging, and relevant.
Those of us attending the Coffee with Congress left with a conviction to do everything within our power to end this horrible disease.
We look forward to the day that Alzheimer's becomes a manageable disorder, or better yet, when researchers find a cure.
#ENDALZ Copyright (c) November 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 1, 2015>
Today we turned our clocks back one hour.
My cell phone and computer both did it for me, but the dozen or so other clocks remain an hour ahead until they are changed.
I always remember which way to turn the clocks by "spring forward" for daylight saving time  and "fall back" to return to standard time.
In one place, I saw it referred to as "turn back time." Turning back time is completely appropriate for another reason than standard time on November 1.
This is the day after Halloween and the religious holiday of "All Saints Day" or as it is celebrated in some countries, "Day of the Dead."  Is there any better way to turn back time than to remember those who have already passed away?
It's strange that I've never thought of this day as the Day of the Dead and never knew much about that tradition.
On this day, millions of people will make annual pilgrimages to cemeteries and churches.
Graves will be decorated with offerings of sugar skulls, flowers, or favorite food and beverages.
Prayers are offered for the spiritual passing of loved ones.
Although I never celebrated the Day of the Dead, for some reason the past week has been an extreme time of reflection for me.
On the drive back from my Alzheimer's Board Meeting, I found myself reminiscing during the hour-long drive over and, again, on the way back.
Who would think something so simple as rolling dips in the road could bring back a vivid memory?
Jim used to hit those dips fast enough that my stomach would feel funny.
I drove past the house on Newland hill where we lived when our kids were little.
I thought about them standing at the end of the driveway waiting for the school bus.
I remembered Christmas, Halloween, and sitting around the dinner table.
I remembered bits and pieces of the life we once had--before time marched on.
I passed the turnoff to Arrow Rock and thought of the good times we spent there.
Remembered the time Jim wandered off during the festival and it took my sister, her husband, and me some scary moments before we found him.
Even before I drove past the cancer hospital, the drive alone made me think of taking my co-worker and friend, Diane, to Columbia for her treatments.
That's a double or triple memory.
Diane's favorite holiday was Halloween and it was with great sadness that the cancer took her on that day.
It is not unusual for a cemetery to evoke memories of loved ones buried there.
When I passed Hopewell, my thoughts turned to Frank and Dorothy that we rented from when we lived on Newland Hill.
I thought of Aunt Addie who wasn't my aunt at all, but a wonderful woman who made the best of life in a wheelchair.
I've spent most of my life living within seven miles of where I live now.
No wonder every curve, hill, and landmark made me think of the people who passed through my life, influencing me, making me the person I am today.
If we really turned back time today--not just for an hour, but could turn it back to a different time, it might not be the miracle that we would envision.
Just think, one small change in our past would bring us to an entirely different destiny.
We could drive ourselves insane with a thousand what ifs.
When a loved one dies, they take a piece of us with them, but they also leave part of themselves behind.
We are left with memories, and we are changed.
Remembering good times is a way to appreciate the gift of  love.
A productive, happy life is based on what we were, how we cherish what we are now, and the audacity to believe the future will be filled with hope, happiness, and adventure.
Copyright (c) November 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 26, 2015>
On Sunday, I was working at the Sedalia Business Women's Chicken Dinner when I saw an elderly lady sitting all alone at a table.
Unlike everyone else, she did not have a plate of chicken and trimmings in front of her.
She had a lost look, and instinctively I knew she had dementia.
Concerned that she had wandered in and didn't have a ticket, I walked over to her and asked, "Are you hungry for chicken?" I had already decided that if she didn't have a ticket, I'd buy her lunch.
She smiled at me, tilted her hand back and forth, and murmured some indiscernible words.
I smiled at her and walked to the ticket table.
"Do you know who that lady is?" I asked.
"No, but I think she has Alzheimer's.
Her husband is fixing her plate." I milled around, refilling drinks, cleaning trays and tables.
Eventually, a lady walked up to me, read my nametag and asked, "Are you the Linda Fisher I saw in the paper that's involved with the Alzheimer's Association." I told her I was.
With tears in her eyes, she told me her husband had Alzheimer's, and she had always wanted to meet me.
Later, another woman introduced herself to me to let me know a mutual friend had steered her toward my blog.
Her husband, only in his sixties, had Alzheimer's.
Eventually, I worked my way back to the table where the lady sat with her husband eating her chicken dinner.
She spotted me and reached out to give me a hug.
"I love you," she said as she kissed me on the cheek.
I hugged her back.
When the hug ended, she kissed my hand.
Her husband smiled and said, "She thinks everyone is the Pope." I introduced myself and told him my husband had passed away at fifty-nine from dementia.
"Then, you understand what we are going through," he said.
"Yes, I do," I said.
We chatted for a while about caregivers.
He had just hired a new one.
He was dismayed with the lack of help and support he had found.
He told me he didn't have a computer, I took his name and phone number to pass on to the Alzheimer's Association.
It doesn't matter where we are or what we are doing, the chances are good we will run into someone who has a personal connection with Alzheimer's--people filled with questions and looking for answers.
Caregivers muddle through the disease doing the best they can based on trial and error.
Unfortunately, when I look into the face of someone with Alzheimer's or the faces of caregivers, I don't have all the answers to their questions.
All I can really do is offer hugs or hug back when I'm being hugged.
Offer support and caring.
Listen.
Accept human flaws.
Know that the worst response is indifference.
I'm thankful that these people shared their personal stories, and thankful for the opportunity to share a hug with a lovely lady who happens to have Alzheimer's.
I'm grateful for a glimpse into her life--learn she was once a teacher, know she has a life beyond the scope of the disease, and grateful she has a husband who fixes her plate and looks out for her well-being.
Alzheimer's disease is as unpredictable as life itself.
Each day is a new adventure and a new experience.
Yesterday, I met a lovely lady named Alice, and just like in Lisa Genova's book, she is still Alice.
Thanks to her, a chicken dinner turned into a once in a lifetime experience of being mistaken for the Pope, and to share a few unforgettable moments with a loving, good-hearted woman named Alice.
Copyright (c) October 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 21, 2015>
I was at Walmart yesterday and the lady checking my groceries asked, "How are you?" "Fine," I answered, "And how are you?" Thank goodness, neither of us answered the question with great thought as to how things were really going.
What if she had launched into a story about her husband's cousin's wife's surgery with complete gory details while the person in line behind me tried to run over me with his cart?
About 99.9 percent of the time, if I ask how someone is, they reply, "Fine." I noticed that Jim retained this "polite" conversational tool when his dementia was so advanced he could barely speak.
If someone said, "How are you?" he would answer, "Fine." He wasn't able to verbalize just how awful his diagnosis was even if he'd wanted to share his state of being.
During the dark days when I was his caregiver, I never once answered a stranger's polite inquiry with the truth.
It was always the stock, and expected, answer.
Occasionally, you will get a more personal question, "How are you holding up," from someone that knows the circumstances of your life.
In that case, we might answer something like, "Things have been better." Even with that hint of a problem, you might still go on your un-merry way to avoid sharing your problems.
I just saw a Wisdom Quote on Facebook that said, "The worst part about being strong is that no one ever asks if you're okay.
It is true that when someone is caring for a loved one with a serious illness, often people only ask about the person with the health problem.
They don't stop to consider that often the caregiver is exhausted physically and drained emotionally.
Most of us don't like to be whiners.
Plain and simple.
Yet, there are those among us who love to whine.
I do know certain people that I've learned the hard way to avoid the simple "How are you" question.
These are the people who suffer the woe-is-me attitude if they have a hangnail.
They will go on and on and on and on...then, when they have to "run" they throw off a casual "How are you" and walk away without waiting for an answer.
Even honest people tell this little white lie.
I guess if you're having a really bad day, it's better than bursting into tears in the middle of the grocery store.
No one wants to have a complete meltdown in public.
Well, almost no one.
Once again, there are those who try to get sympathy, or maybe a handout, from strangers.
It isn't easy to avoid the pleasantries either.
One day at a checkout, the young woman asked, "How are you?" I replied "Fine" as I tried to get the card to swipe.
"I'm fine too," she said.
"Thanks for asking." It sounded a whole lot like a rebuke to me for not continuing a pointless exchange.
Or did she simply hear what she expected?
I plan to continue with social pleasantries, even when it's a big fat fib--at least with strangers.
With whiners, I might just say "hello" and avoid eye contact.
Copyright (c) October 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 13, 2015>
My grandkids are always wanting me to tell them spooky stories.
I have several to choose from about my younger days when Jim and I managed to live in some scary places and had strange experiences galore.
It only stood to reason that when my mom, sisters, and I planned a girls' mini-vacation at  Hannibal, a ghost tour would be on the agenda.
In all my extensive travels, I had never visited the town that served as Mark Twain's inspiration for Tom Sawyer.
We arrived in Hannibal at a good time to take a trolley tour to get the lay of the land.
While we were waiting, a "Ghost Tour" sign caught our attention.
We strolled inside and signed up for a tour at 7:00 p.m. During the day, we rode the riverboat and still squeezed in a little shopping.
My sisters and I bought vintage hats to wear on the ghost tour.
Our ghost tour guides, Ken and Lisa, asked whether we were more interested in history or ghosts.
Our preference was both, so we heard about Hannibal's rich history and haunted tales.
During the tour, we stopped in front of several bed and breakfasts, an old church, and the Rockcliffe Mansion.
Ken and Lisa had lived in the mansion and told us chilling stories of their adventures.
Doors slamming and footsteps on the stairs would be enough to make me hide my head beneath the covers.
The mansion's history is unusual.
In its time it was the biggest and most opulent mansion in Missouri.
Lumber baron John J. Cruikshank chose a spot already occupied by a mansion.
He moved the offending house next door and eventually his daughter lived there.
After Cruikshank died, his widow moved from Rockcliffe to her daughter's home leaving nearly all her belongings behind.
All that's left of the maps.
Rockcliffe  remained abandoned for 43 years, its windows broken out, and the rite-of-passage for teenagers was to go into the house to the third floor and rip off a piece of the map in the children's room.
I'm sure it was considered a sign of bravery to accomplish this route without freaking out.
Although, the mansion's ghosts are considered to be friendly, Casper-type ghosts, I decided that I wouldn't want to spend the night there.
Our tour ended with a trip to the cemetery, spooky to be sure.
Although I'd visited a cemetery on a previous ghost tour, it was not like this one.
The other cemetery was in the middle of Boston and well-lighted.
This cemetery was on the edge of town, no lights, and although it had been cleaned up, it was still an old, old cemetery with toppled stones around the fringes.
We were furnished with divining rods and tiny two-inch flashlights.
I wouldn't touch the rods after we were instructed how to get yes and no answers because it reminded me of a Ouija board pointer.
I've had some hair-raising experiences with Ouija boards and didn't want to be calling up any spirits without Ghost Busters on speed dial.
The next day, after visiting the museum and Twain's boyhood home, we toured Rockcliffe.
You've heard about pictures that have eyes that follow you no matter where you are.
Well, there's one of John Cruikshank that does that.
I'm not ashamed to say that's just a little bit creepy.
After seeing the bedrooms, I'm sure I would not have had a restful night had we chosen to stay there.
Old clothes, hats, and shoes in the closet made me think the lady of the manor might return to change her clothing.
To finish our journey, we drove into Illinois looking for Burbridge Cemetery where several of our ancestors are buried.
We got lost.
We finally asked a local and he directed us to it.
My sister consulted her genealogy book and we found several graves listed in the book.
We took photos and headed for home.
It is always fun to spend time with family.
It's something most of us put aside for the busy, mundane things we do in life.
Sometimes, it helps to take a step back and think about how after we're gone, a stone may be the only visible reminder of our time on earth.
Someday, that stone may be part of a ghost tour and a tourist with a divining rod may be asking us yes and no questions.
Wouldn't it be so much fun to groan loudly and say, "Get your big fat foot off my head!" Copyright (c) October 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 5, 2015>
Last week during the full-blood-super-moon eclipse, I discovered that I wasn't my normal self.
I woke up at 10:30 a.m. after an extraordinarily long night of nightmare infested slumber.
To say I got up on the wrong side of the bed is an understatement--it was more like I got up on the wrong side of the house.
Cranky, headachy, and on the verge of tears, it's no wonder my husband retreated to his office for the day.
His main goal of the day was to steer clear of the crazy woman in the kitchen.
There was no explanation for the way I felt.
It just was, and it wasn't going away.
It all boiled down to simply having a bad day.
What causes us to have a bad day?
Most of the time, it is because of external problems beyond our control that make us nervous or unhappy.
Too often, we let the behavior of others ruin an otherwise good day.
Someone makes a hurtful or disparaging remark that sinks its ugly roots into our self-esteem and the worry of its validity gnaws at our self-worth.
Some bad days, like the one I had, are internal.
An unsettling night that spilled over into the daylight.
Anyone can have a bad day, but people with dementia have more than their share.
When you take into account their daily wrestling match with confusion and the other symptoms Alzheimer's causes, it helps you understand how bad days can be plentiful.
The unfortunate nature of a bad day is that it can be contagious.
When the person with dementia has a bad day, the caregiver has a bad day too.
So what the heck can you do about that?
It's hard enough to deal with yourself, much less someone else, when emotions are out of whack, common sense is on vacation, and patience abandoned ship.
It's time to give yourself a time-out.
Do something you really love to do, even if you can spare only a few minutes.
Some suggestions: a half-hour comedy (I can't possibly stay depressed watching the Golden Girls), read a magazine or a chapter in a good book, go for a walk, call your mom or a good friend, or bake cookies.
After your time-out, take a few deep breaths, and if you baked cookies, now would be a good time to have some with a glass of milk.
Now you are ready to stay calm--the number one method for handling your loved one's bad day.
Hopefully, you've regained your ability to be patient, because you will need an abundance of it.
A good rule to remember is that what worked yesterday may not work today, so be flexible.
Distraction is your friend.
If your loved one is crying, or in a really bad mood, you may want to scoop up an ice cream cone.
One thing that always worked with Jim was taking a drive.
He loved getting in the car and heading down the road.
An even better trip for him was when we stopped by DQ for a milkshake.
When a person with dementia has a bad day, it shows in his behavior.
Though easier said than done, your best response is to address the emotion rather than the behavior.
There is no one cause for a bad day and there isn't one solution.
I think my bad day was the result of a bad night and, of course, the full moon.
Probably the real reason is that I'm human with human emotions.
So, I had a bad day.
It wasn't the first, and rest assured, it won't be the last.
Copyright (c) October 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 21, 2015>
Jimmy, Tommy, Mitchell, Roberta, Linda, Mom, Terri On a cold February night, just as we were going to bed, I casually mentioned to Harold that this was my year to host our family get-together.
We used to gather on Thanksgiving at my mom and dad's house.
After Dad died, and Mom sold the house to my brother Mitchell, we converged on them for several years until we made a change with tradition.
We decided to pass the hosting around by going from oldest to youngest and decided to meet in September when the weather was better.
"When were you going to tell me this?" he asked.
"Oh, about August," I replied.
Harold is the planner.
I, on the other hand, am a seat-of-the-pants type person.
Well, he wasn't having any of that.
After a barrage of questions about logistics, I finally suggested we have the event at the park so we wouldn't have to find tables, chairs, etc.
that he was worrying about seven months ahead of time.
By March, we had rented the shelter at the park and worked on a list of things to do.
In addition to the place, the host family provides the meat, drinks, and table service.
The reunion was Sunday, and we couldn't have asked for better weather.
We were up at 6:00 a.m., and Harold was in drill-sergeant mode.
Before I could get a cup of coffee, he was slicing up the pork loin we'd cooked the day before, and one of the huge hams he had bought for the occasion.
By the time we got the first ham in the roaster oven it was full.
Harold was still fretting that we weren't going to have enough meat.
"That's plenty," I said.
After all, Stacey was bringing two turkey breasts.
"This isn't like the Fisher reunion," I said.
The Fisher reunion is for anyone with the last name, but this reunion is for our immediate family, children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren.
"We usually have about thirty people, not a hundred." He finally settled on cooking an additional three-pound ham, just in case.
Then we fixed gallons and gallons of tea.
Thank goodness, Rob came by with his pickup to help us load everything into his truck and our Tahoe.
On the way to town, I began to feel the excitement.
Until then, I'd been too busy.
I love spending time with my family, and don't see them as often as I should.
Both my sons were there and my two youngest grandchildren.
My two oldest grandkids work on weekends, but Whitney would be coming by on her lunch hour.
Rob set up a PC to play a CD made from a video of a Capps family Thanksgiving from the early 1990's.
Mom was taking a turkey out of the oven, and my husband Jim was running the video camera.
After everyone found the right shelter, we decided to go ahead and start eating.
My brother Mitchell had not arrived, but was on his way.
Tommy asked a short blessing.
"Wow, that must be the shortest blessing you've ever done," I said.
"He's still going on the videotape," someone said.
Sure enough, the CD was still rolling and Tommy was still asking the blessing.
In all fairness, we used to update everyone on our family, and he had the largest family.
We visited and took photos of the brothers, sisters, and our mom.
Marshall wasn't able to come this year and our brother Donnie passed away Thanksgiving eve in 2012.
The time just flew by, and before it seemed possible, people were leaving.
It had been a beautiful day to spend with people I love.
Of all things in life, family matters the most.
Copyright (c) September 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, September 18, 2015>
Our Walk to End Alzheimer's was Saturday.
Nearly a full year of preparation all came together for a flawless event.
The one thing you can't really control is the weather, but it cooperated in a big way.
The day was gorgeous, and for once, I didn't have butterflies worrying about whether it was going to rain...or be so hot that someone could have heatstroke.
Before the Walk, we determined the eldest walker (Uncle Johnny) and the youngest, Bella Howard, a sweet baby wearing a Fairview shirt.
The best individual fundraiser, Jessica Snell, was announced.
Trophies were awarded to Sylvia G. Thompson for best fundraising and largest team.
Jessie from the Greater Missouri Chapter surprised me with an award.
She pulled out a photo collage that immediately brought back memories.
She asked me to say a few words.
"They caught me off guard," I said.
Then, I became so choked up, I had to pause before I could continue.
Normally, when I speak, I prepare myself mentally to keep the emotions on the inside.
After a brief pause, I was able to thank the wonderful walkers and teams that have supported our efforts throughout the years.
Then, I told everyone how important the Walk was to me personally and how it helped me through the tough times.
It gave me a focus and a way to feel good about helping put an end to this awful disease.
The extra bonus for the day was that the weather was also perfect for the other two outdoor events I planned to attend.
At three o'clock, my great-niece was married in the same locale where we held the walk--the Highway Gardens on the Fairgrounds.
Larry Cooper The final event to end my day was to watch "Changed By Grace" perform at the Sedalia Rockin' for Jesus show.
Besides the spiritual implications of the evening, two of the band members happen to be my nephews Mike Munsterman and Larry Cooper.
Mike Munsterman I thoroughly enjoyed their uplifting performance and their testimonies.
A song that really made me think about life was one  Larry wrote, "On the Inside." The song is about how we work to have all the material possessions, but then fall into the trap of devoting our lives to gaining even more worldly goods.
Looking successful on the outside does not necessarily make a person happy or feel good about how he got to that point in life.
In the song, Larry shares the importance of living life in such a way that a person feels good on the inside.
Mike, too, has found a way to feel good on the inside.
He has put his life back together after losing his wife Krystal.
He has made a positive impact on the homeless through Krystal's Dream.
Mike has traveled far and wide to provide shoes and socks to those who have fallen on hard times.
Through his mission, he has taken a tragedy that could have broken him, and turned it into action to help others.
To feel good on the inside you have to find that sweet spot in your soul where love, peace, and spirituality come to life.
The important times in our lives are the heart moments spent doing what we love and being with those we love.
Is there anything better than living life in such a manner that it really does make us feel good on the inside?
Sometimes we just need to put aside the negative thoughts and pressures that daily life brings and focus on the positive, happy times that make us smile.
Copyright (c) September 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 8, 2015>
In "The Rainy Day" Henry Wadsworth Longfellow said, "Into each life some rain must fall."  At times we pray for rain, the refreshing life-essential drops that come from the heavens to end droughts.
Other times, when we have an important outdoor activity we don't want it to rain.
We wonder why it can't hold off for just a while longer.
Is that too much to ask?
Labor Day is our day for our big Walk to End Alzheimer's fundraiser for Jim's team.
This was our 17th year to do the "traffic stop." It seems the day is usually unbearably hot, and this year looked to be more of the same.
Then, the forecast called for heat and a chance of rain.
"Will you still do the stop if it rains, or will you reschedule," my niece asked the day before.
"We can't reschedule it.
If it rains, we'll stand in the rain.
If we have a thunderstorm, we'll wait it out in our cars," I said.
In all the previous years, we only had one rainy day.
It was a blessing in disguise because the intermittent, gentle showers made for a cooler day.
As we began setting up our signs, a few gentle drops fell.
Not bad, I thought.
Suppose to last only a short while and move out.
Soon, the rain began falling a little harder, and eventually, those of us who brought umbrellas stood beneath them.
Only Shelly and Chris didn't have umbrellas.
Chris was wearing a raincoat, but Shelly just stood alongside the road with her collection can without protection against the rain that stalled over our heads.
I glanced down the street and saw a lady coming out of her house carrying a smiley-face umbrella.
She talked to Shelly for a few minutes and handed her the umbrella.
This woman had lived in the house for eleven years and noticed us every year and admired our tenacity to continue through the hot days in the past.
She gave Shelly a donation and insisted she take the umbrella.
The woman told Shelly that her sister was only in her fifties and had been diagnosed with early-onset Alzheimer's.
The relentless rain fell on our "parade" until the last half hour.
Water was running down the ditches, and the umbrellas didn't keep the rain from soaking us.
I didn't mind the wet shirt and capris nearly as much as sloshing around with wet socks and shoes.
Hey, it was still better than one-hundred degree heat.
We didn't let the rain dampen our spirits.
In his poem, Longfellow isn't speaking of physical rain.
He is speaking of the dark times when we cling to the past and "days are dark and dreary." It makes me think of a conversation I had with a caregiver recently.
She was battling depression and felt overwhelmed taking care of her husband who has Alzheimer's.
Yet, while we talked, I could tell she had the courage and indomitable spirit to keep on keeping on.
We all deal with our own personal rainy days.
Sometimes they are gentle showers, and we can just shrug them off.
We can even soldier through those steady downpours without much ado.
Then there are those times when the wind is gusting, the thunder is booming, and a torrential downpour flash floods all over our last ray of optimism.
Before you let rainy, turbulent times dampen your spirits, remember the sun is still above those pesky clouds.
Sunshine after a rain is glorious; rays beam down like the word of God, and the rainbow promises better days to come.
Copyright (c) September 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 30, 2015>
A couple of days ago, Harold popped a big bowl of popcorn and we settled in front of the T.V.
to watch the old episodes of Castle recorded on our DVR.
I pushed the "on" button, and nothing happened.
After pushing on/off/select numerous times, the most I could get on the T.V.
was "no signal." Harold tried to reset the satellite receiver without success, so it was time to call DISH.
After a half hour of trying this, selecting that, and retrying to acquire a signal, a heavily accented voice said they would be mailing us a new receiver.
After some tough negotiations, Harold convinced them they needed to send a repair person to come out and set up the new receiver.
They will be here Tuesday.
So without any other kind of reception, we are without a T.V.
Being without a T.V.
isn't so bad.
It reminded me of the good old days when we didn't watch T.V.
in the summer because all programs were reruns.
So what did we do without all the extensive programming on T.V.?
Well, we read books and spent time outside.
Thank goodness, I had a book on my Kindle to read, and I had gone a little overboard at Books-A-Million when I was in Branson.
The spending time outside has worked well.
Friday, I spent the day with my mom and sister.
We visited, ate at Country Kitchen.
I didn't miss T.V.
at all.
The real acid test was Saturday.
As it turned out, my major complaint with Saturday was that there wasn't enough time to take a break.
We were up early and fixed a big breakfast--different from our routine of coffee and bagel in front of the T.V.
After a day of mowing, yard work, and going to town, the day was over, and I hadn't gotten a single thing marked off my personal task list.
Determined to at least get one thing checked off, I worked until nearly midnight.
T.V.?
What's that?
This morning, I dragged myself out of bed for early church services.
I wore one of my purple Alzheimer's shirts and picked up a copy of Broken Road: Navigating the Alzheimer's Labyrinth to give to Pastor Jim for being the inspiration for some of my blog posts.
As I walked into the sanctuary, they had me choose a rock.
"You'll need it during the service," was the explanation.
I was hopeful we weren't going to "stone" anyone for his or her transgressions.
I go to contemporary services at the Celebration Center.
We have a band and the lyrics to our songs are displayed on a screen.
One of our pastors, Nick, brought a message about the traditional Methodist Hymnal and the "rules" for singing the songs.
The rules included learning the tunes, singing them exactly as they are written, everyone should sing (take up your cross and bear it, if necessary), sing lustfully (not as half-dead or asleep), yet modestly without destroying the harmony, keep time and sing with the leading voices, and most of all sing spiritually.
Hymnals have the traditional hymns that we sang back in the "good old days." After the message from 1 Samuel about a stone he called Ebenezer, we sang a traditional hymn, "Come, Thou Fount of Every Blessing."  The women sang the melody and the men repeated a line.
It was really quite beautiful, and I think John Wesley would have been proud.
One of the lines in the song is, "Here I raise my Ebenezer." As we sang the song, we came forward in the same manner as communion and placed our rocks on the altar.
It was a touching moment that made me feel like I'd taken a step back to another, simpler time.
Maybe the "good old days" weren't always good, but something about them tugs at the heart.
It's the place of our memories and the roots of our traditions.
Those were days when we were young and full of hope.
Taking a step back for a few days is a welcome relief.
Soon, very soon, I'll be ready to return to watching my favorite programs, but for now--I'm doing just fine without T.V.
Copyright (c) August 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 26, 2015>
Rob popped in another video to dub.
Christmas, 1991.
Jim and his brother Billy began to sing "Bridge Over Troubled Waters" in their close harmony.
My heart stopped to hear his voice, see him on the somewhat grainy film--standing straight, playing his classic Fender guitar.
Watching our home videos made me laugh and made me cry.
Jim narrated as he filmed everything around him for "posterity." No event was too small or insignificant.
He chose who he was making the video for and encouraged everyone to say "hi" to that person.
One tape was for his brother Bob, "and Barbara, too," he added when he remembered he hadn't mentioned her.
A Thanksgiving tape at my mom's house was specifically for my brother Jimmy who was in the Navy in California.
"Did Dad ever send these videos to the people he made them for?" Rob asked me.
"No.
That's why we still have them," I said.
One time after he became confused, Jim made an audiotape for his cousin Leroy.
His mom saw him walk out to the mailbox and raise the flag.
Curious, she went out to see what he was mailing.
Inside the mailbox was a cassette tape with "for Leroy" written on it.
No postage.
No wrapping.
No address.
Jim's personality and humor uplifted the videos to an experience.
Most of Jim's family loved the camera.
His uncles and cousins would ham it up in standup comedian mode.
Uncle Jewel described his many personalities and mashed his face flat in one video.
Jim interviewed his cousin Buddy about the lady ranger bawling him out over not coming to a complete stop at the campground's exit.
"Don't they have stop signs in Missouri?" Jim asked.
The highlights of the old home videos are family gatherings.
Houses and yards overflowed with family.
Guitars, fiddles, microphones, and amplifiers were dragged out for impromptu family concerts.
Everyone had their "special" songs to sing and requests rang out from the audience for their favorites.
I loved being able to see and hear Jim tell his corny jokes, tall tales, but most of all, I loved to hear him sing.
I watched the tapes of him singing through blurred eyes.
He and his brother Billy sang several songs, and the song "Bridge Over Troubled Waters" was almost prophetic.
It told of comfort, friends, dreams, and having that person to hold you up when times are rough.
More important it told the kind of man Jim was.
He was always on my side.
He was my husband, my friend, my bridge.
He encouraged me to shine.
In addition to stealing Jim's musical talent, dementia stole his voice.
It seems like a small miracle to hear his voice after all the years of silence.
When the darkness of dementia fell he was no longer able to dry my tears, or be my bridge.
I had to find my own way back into the light.
It was almost twenty years ago when we learned the hard truth of dementia.
We made the most of the time we had until the journey ended April 18, 2005 when Jim was 59 years old.
Thursday, August 27, would have been Jim's 70th birthday.
It would have been a day of celebration, but now it is a time of remembrance.
And gratitude for the adventures we shared.
Jim is gone from our world, but his essence lives on the videotapes and in his children and grandchildren.
Last week when Whitney pulled out her ukulele, her mother said, "Your Grandpa Jim could have taught you so much." Just like her grandpa, she is collecting different instruments to play.
When I see Whitney's short videos online, it makes me think that her Grandpa Jim would have been capturing every moment he could for "posterity." Music and family were the great loves of Jim's life.
We are fortunate to have those magical memories stored in our hearts and on the old videotapes.
Copyright (c) August 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 18, 2015>
Jessica Snell, Sedalia Walk to End Alzheimer's co-chair, and I were at the radio station Tuesday morning to talk about the Walk to End Alzheimer's.
We were armed with the names of our sponsors and teams, goals, and statistics.
It's always a pleasure to be on the air with Doug, and even better to record the program for broadcast the next day.
When you are on the air live, you just have to go with it, but when the program is recorded and your tongue gets tangled, you get "overs." We all need overs from time to time.
I've been involved with the Walk since 1998 and during that time, I've seen a lot of changes.
The first year, I raised $400 and Jim and I walked with a handful of people.
For the next five years, I was the coordinator, or Walk chair, of our local Memory Walk.
At that time, our logo was the word "Alzheimer's" with the "H" being two people, leaning.
The Alzheimer's Association was well known as "Someone to lean on." The Walk began to draw hundreds of walkers.
For the next five years, Shelley Spinner coordinated our Walk and I backed off the committee to make sure everyone saw her as the leader of the group.
She did a great job of keeping the Walk exciting and fresh.
I was able to concentrate on being captain of Jim's Team.
Following her, Lisa Hayworth led the Walk committee for two years.
Lisa had no experience or help.
At that time, my sister-in-law Ginger and I went back on the committee, and we've remained on it since then helping Sheila Ream.
Some things change and others remain the same.
The Alzheimer's Association changed the logo to the current one and "Memory Walk" to Walk to End Alzheimer's.
Some of the format has changed.
The Promise ceremony has been added and it encompasses the different ways that Alzheimer's affects us.
Our local chapter has changed names from Mid-Missouri to Greater Missouri, merged with the Southwest Chapter, and became a national chapter.
What does this all mean?
We still have chapter offices where they were located previously and the Alzheimer's Association still provides the personal service that helped me throughout the years when dementia ruled our lives.
Another change I've seen over the years is how people have become more knowledgeable about the disease.
When I first approached area businesses in 1999 for corporate sponsorship, no one seemed to know much about Alzheimer's.
Now, everyone seems to know a few basics.
A lot of credit goes to the Alzheimer's Association for raising public awareness.
The Walk is about people.
It is a time to show care and concern for those with the disease and their loved ones.
It is a time when everyone puts aside their differences and embraces the opportunity to support their friends, neighbors, and relatives who are dealing with Alzheimer's.
We have teams with different names, but in essence, we are all one team.
Competition is fierce, but friendly.
I celebrate the teams that raise more than our team.
When I was coordinating the Sedalia Walk, I became friends with Ted Distler who coordinated the Jefferson City Walk.
We "trash talked" each other all the time about which town was going to raise more money.
In truth, it was all in competitive fun, and we supported each other at fundraisers.
Ted would drive to Sedalia for our Dance to Remember, and I'd drive to Jefferson City for their Chicken Dinner.
We had the same connection to the disease and the same passion for doing what we could to help other care partners and persons with dementia.
What people don't understand is Walk to End Alzheimer's is a fun event.
Yes, it is sobering at times when you hear the stories of the participants, and the flower ceremony is touching, but knowing that you are doing your part is heart lifting.
Smiles, laughter, and love are the order of the day.
You don't want to miss it or you'll have to wait another year.
From babies in strollers to seniors in wheelchairs, we lend support and lean on each other to end Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) August 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 1, 2015>
Photo by L.S.
Fisher, color enhanced There's been a lot of talk about blue moons lately.
"Why is the moon going to turn blue?" my granddaughter asked a few weeks ago when we were talking about the upcoming blue moon.
Her mom explained that a "blue" moon had nothing to do with color and meant two full moons occur in one month.
We just had a blue moon--at least according to some sources, but in our time of too much information, some purists disagree with this definition.
Up until 1946, a blue moon was the third full moon in an astronomical season with four full moons.
The confusion came about when James Pruett, a hobby astronomer, published an article that said a second full moon in one month was a blue moon.
Although the mistake was noted and refuted, the information had already spread worldwide and became the accepted definition of a blue moon.
Let's face it.
It's much easier to notice a second moon in one month than to determine how many full moons occur in a season.
According to the original definition of a blue moon, the one we just celebrated was not, in fact, a blue moon.
One that we will ignore, most likely, will occur May 21, 2016--the third full moon in an astronomical season.
But we will easily notice the one January 31, 2018, the second full moon in the month.
By either definition, a blue moon doesn't occur too often, and the expression, "once in a blue moon" means something that happens rarely.
Some reasons for those "once in a blue moon" occurrences: Something we don't like to do and put off.
In this category are      chores like washing windows, cleaning the garage, and pulling weeds.
Tedious, time-consuming tasks that always seem better left for another      day.
Same goes for uncomfortable, routine medical tests like mammograms, colonoscopies, or endoscopies.
Procrastination, indeed!
We've gotten out of the habit.
We haven't gone to church      for a while, so Sunday seems like the perfect day to sleep late.
After      missing two or three club or committee meetings, we are out of the loop,      and choose to leave it that way.
Not enough time.
Life is so busy now that we don't have time to phone a      friend much less visit a loved one with Alzheimer's in the nursing home.
Busy,      busy, busy.
That's how most of us live now.
We're so busy being busy that      we miss out on the important things in life.
Maybe in reality, it is fine for some things to happen once in a blue moon, but others shouldn't.
It's really up to each of us to decide what goes into which category--once in a blue moon or much more frequently.
Just living isn't nearly as important as having a life.
In my world, things that happen once in a blue moon, or rarely, could be considered somewhat common.
I'm okay with that most of the time, but sometimes I have regrets that I didn't make that phone call or visit a loved one.
Maybe, at least once in a blue moon, I should just take time to lounge in a lawn chair in the shade of the oak tree, sip a mint julep, and read a trashy novel.
Copyright (c) August 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 21, 2015>
Alzheimer's is a global problem and scientist from around the world share information in a unified effort to find an effective treatment or cure for Alzheimer's disease.
Representing 65 countries, more than 4,000 scientists gathered in Washington D.C. for the Alzheimer's Association International Conference 2015.
One of the exciting developments of this year's conference is a report that new drugs have yielded promising early results for treatment of several brain diseases.
Finding the key to effectively treating Alzheimer's disease may unlock the mystery of other neurodegenerative diseases.
Scientists have found common components of several brain diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Lewy body dementia.
What do these diseases have in common?
They all cause brain cell death because of a change in the shape of a protein.
This protein can become toxic and affects the nerve cells or synapses.
The proteins that affect Alzheimer's disease are beta-amyloid and tau.
Lewy bodies are the protein associated with Parkinson's and Lewy body dementia.
Misfolded proteins bind to other proteins and form large aggregates.
What are some of the drugs being tested?
Richard Fisher, PhD, NeuroPhage Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA, and a group of colleagues are researching NPT088.
This drug has been tested on animal models with Parkinson's and Alzheimer's.
In most cases, it reduced levels of amyloid beta, tau, and alpha-synuclein (the main component of Lewy bodies).
Animal models showed improved memory.
Clinical trials should take place in 2016.
Another new drug, TRV101, is being tested in Toronto, ON, Canada, by Treventis Corporation.
This group used computer models to screen more than 11 million compounds to find ones that could prevent toxic proteins.
In test tubes, TRV 101 is capable of allowing natural clearing mechanisms to remove protein aggregates.
Clearing toxic proteins should improve cognitive function.
This research has moved to animal testing.
Alzheimer's is a complicated disease and a cure has been elusive.
Effective treatment is more likely to be a cocktail of drugs, rather than a single medication.
This is similar to how HIV/AIDs and other disorders are treated.
As with other major diseases, lifestyle changes are part of the treatment for Alzheimer's.
Researchers are optimistic that Alzheimer's risk has declined for recent generations due to better cardiovascular care, blood pressure management, controlling diabetes, and realizing the importance of physical activity and a healthy diet.
The great thing about lifestyle changes, you don't have to wait for a drug to come down the pipeline, you can just jump in and begin!
Right now improving a healthy diet is an easy fix with fresh vegetables from my garden.
This is one time of the year that something that tastes good, homegrown tomatoes, is good for me.
People today are more socially active.
At least I know I am.
Reading the news on my smart phone or having articles delivered to my in-box keeps my mind active.
For fun, I throw in a few crossword puzzles or read a book.
Between research and common sense practices, we are moving in the right direction to make Alzheimer's a distant memory.
Copyright (c) July 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 7, 2015>
Serial stowaway, sixty-three-year-old Marilyn Hartman, was caught at O'Hare Airport trying to board a flight without a ticket.
While some people are afraid of flying, Marilyn seems to be obsessed with the idea.
She's been arrested several times at airports for trying to board without a ticket.
Oddly enough, Ms. Hartman had a valid ticket the day before her arrest, but caused such a disturbance that she was escorted off the plane.
I'm beginning to think she wants to be wherever she isn't, including on a plane.
She's been arrested on the west coast, Phoenix, and more recently in Chicago--at both O-Hare and Midway.
She once remarked to reporters that airports were safer than living on the streets.
Why does she keep trying to stowaway on airplanes when it leads to jail time?
She said, "Even smart people do stupid things." Well, that statement is entirely true, but I believe she can't help herself because she wants to be somewhere besides "here," wherever here may be.
Maybe all of us have a little of this compulsion to be somewhere else.
Who hasn't spent a tough day at the job and had a strong urge to be at a favorite vacation spot instead?
This lady has just carried it to an entirely different level.
When we're young, we long to grow up.
Once we are grownups, we want the carefree days of our youth.
Time and space can be our friend or our enemy.
People with Alzheimer's often want to be in a different place.
They pace.
They want to go home, even though they are at home.
They want to be someplace else.
Anywhere but where they are.
Wandering is a common problem with Alzheimer's.
It's dangerous for the person and worrisome for the family.
Think about how confusing and strange their world is, and it's easier to understand why they want to find what they've lost.
Their shattered memory may tell them they live in a certain house, even though they once knew that it had been sold or torn down.
I knew a man with Alzheimer's who wandered off frequently and walked across town to the house where once he had lived with his first wife.
She still lived there, and when he showed up, she phoned his current wife to come and get him.
She would  offer him coffee, or breakfast, while they waited.
When life gets tough, we often want to place distance between where we actually are and where we theoretically could be.
It's fight or flight.
While most of us fight, a few of us flee.
Maybe Ms. Hartman really is smart and finds jail to be safer than the streets.
It probably doesn't hurt to have three guaranteed meals a day.
I believe she knows her chances of boarding without a "ticket to ride" are slim.
I would say slim to none, but she managed to fly from San Jose to Los Angeles without a ticket.
Some people try to run away from their problems, but could Ms. Hartman be trying to run away from herself?
When she is released from jail, we'll be hearing about her again.
And again.
A serial stowaway headed for nowhere, or anywhere but where she is.
Copyright (c) July 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 29, 2015>
Last night I watched  Glen Campbell...I'll Be Me on CNN.
The 2014 film documents Glen's Alzheimer's journey.
I heard about the documentary a few years ago at the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum.
My mom went to D.C. with me in 2013 when Glen Campbell was there.
He fairly oozed charm and posed to have his photo taken with many of the ladies, including my mom.
I'll Be Me was painful for me to watch.
It brought back memories of Jim's loss of communication and musical skills.
At least only family witnessed Jim's problems and not a paying audience.
The family told of their struggles to make sure they walked the fine line between the cathartic benefits of Glen performing and being vigilant of him embarrassing himself.
Audiences were tolerant.
If he played the same song twice, so what?
At least they got to see him perform.
Campbell's physician felt that performing on his "Goodbye Tour," doing what Glen loved, helped  him maintain the ability to function longer.
Sometimes his daughter, Ashley, had to tell her dad the correct key for certain songs.
During their "dueling" instruments, her with a banjo, him with his guitar, she admitted that sometimes he didn't always follow along.
Glen relied heavily on teleprompters to remind him of the words to songs he had sung for years.
During his doctor visits, I heard some of the same questions with similar answers during Jim's visits with his neurologist.
When asked questions, he couldn't answer, Campbell said, "I don't worry about those things." The doctor asked him who the first president of the United States was and Campbell replied, "My goodness, I don't know.
I don't use that very much lately." Jim would typically say, "I have no idea," in a tone that indicated he didn't care to know either.
Ashley testified in front of a congressional hearing on Alzheimer's.
Advocates in D.C. for the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum, wearing purple sashes, packed the room.
Ashley's emotional testimony explained the changes in her relationship with her dad.
She said it was hard for him to recall her name.
Their times fishing together no longer lives in his memories.
When watching old family films, Glen asked, "Who's that?" His wife, Kim, gently supplied the pertinent information: "It's you, honey," or "That's your first wife," or "It's your oldest daughter."  Jim once looked at photos from our honeymoon.
I pointed at a photo of me, and playfully said, "Do you know who that is?" His answer, of course, was, "I have no idea." The devil is in the details.
Some of the most hurtful moments are when you realize what had been memories shared, become your memories alone.
The film shows the relentless progression of Alzheimer's disease.
By the time of his final performance on stage, Glen did not know it was his last performance.
Cal Campbell said that when his dad performed, "He actually becomes himself again." The story ended with the recording session of "I'm Not Going to Miss You." At this point, Glen is already fading away but his eyes sparkle when he finally gets into the song.
This song really tugs at the heartstrings.
The idea stemmed from Campbell's remark that he couldn't figure out why everyone was so worried about him having Alzheimer's.
He said, "It's not like I'm going to miss anyone, anyway." Kim finally placed Glenn in a home where he could get twenty-four hour care.
He is reportedly happy and healthy.
He is losing his communication skills and doesn't recognize many of his visitors.
As is often the case, family is feuding.
Two of his children by a previous marriage have taken legal action against Kim.
This family is torn apart at a time they should be pulling together.
Individuals must arrive at acceptance in their own way and on their personal time schedule.
Glen Campbell's Alzheimer's story is heartrending and, oh, so familiar to millions who have lived a similar story.
Copyright (c) June 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 20, 2015>
I've been seeing images of a "Limited Edition" T-shirt for Alzheimer's Awareness.
The shirt says, "Supporting the Fighters, Admiring the Survivors, Honoring the Taken, And Never Giving Up Hope, Alzheimer's Awareness." People seemed to be excited about buying these T-shirts.
I don't want to burst the bubble of enthusiasm, but this shirt certainly does not promote Alzheimer's awareness.
At our annual Walk to End Alzheimer's, we cannot have a victory lap for our survivors.
The cold, hard fact is that Alzheimer's leaves no survivors.
Alzheimer's is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States and the only one in the top ten that cannot be prevented, cured, or even slowed.
Twenty million Americans understand this harsh reality: five million with the disease and their fifteen million unpaid caregivers.
Alzheimer's does have fighters--millions of them.
We have warriors with the disease and care partners who raise awareness and dollars so that we can have survivors someday.
These brave people share their stories, their struggles, their highs, and lows as they live life to the fullest.
They celebrate each moment of joy and refuse to cave in to despair.
Several years ago, I met a forty-year-old woman in Washington, D.C., who had early onset Alzheimer's.
As we told our personal stories to our senators and representative, she said, "I know it's too late for me, but I want a cure for my children.
I don't want them to have to go through this." She is gone and has been for several years, but we continue her fight to make her wishes come true.
Family members and loved ones honor the taken.
Jim was taken before his sixtieth birthday.
We honor the loved ones we've lost each time we join a Walk to End Alzheimer's.
We honor them by becoming advocates, or "voices," for Alzheimer's research and hounding legislators to push for increased funding.
Advocacy makes a difference!
This week we received word that due to the relentless dedication of Alzheimer's advocates, increased research funding is making its way through the legislative process.
The House Labor, Health and Human Services Appropriations Subcommittee has approved an additional $300 million in Alzheimer's research.
Harry Johns, Alzheimer's Association CEO said, "Should this increase become law, it will be the largest annual increase ever in federal Alzheimer's research funding.
Following today's actions, the full House Appropriations Committee is expected to consider this legislation next week.
We also anticipate that the Senate will begin to move their own version of the FY16 Labor-HHS bill next week."   Advocates will never give up hope!
The National Plan to Address Alzheimer's Disease sets forth a goal to find a cure or effective treatment by 2025.
With adequate funding to support the bright scientific minds at work on a cure, our goal is within reach.
When our work is done, I'll be at the front of the line to buy a T-shirt that has "Admire the survivors" on it.
Until then, we need to keep the momentum going and stick to the Plan to find the elusive cure and/or effective treatment for Alzheimer's no later than 2025, but hopefully much, much sooner.
Copyright (c) June 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, June 14, 2015>
Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease in America.
Our country faces an impending financial crisis.
One out of every five dollars Medicare spends is for a person with dementia.
This care amounted to $150 billion in Medicare and Medicaid expense last year.
The cost to Medicare for persons with dementia is three times higher than for seniors without the disease.
The emotional impact on caregivers contributes to health issues for them.
Caregivers pay an additional $9.7 billion for their own health care.
Dementia is costly to families.
It strips away at the family finances.
This is a disease fraught with unexpected expenses ranging from adult personal care products to hiring a sitter.
Whether caring for a loved one at home or placing them into long-term care, families are hit emotionally and financially on a regular basis.
It becomes a way of life.
When facing the dementia financial crisis, families sometimes sell possessions they would have never considered under normal circumstances.
Jim and I sold our lake property.
It had once been our intention to retire there, but retirement was never to be for us.
Recently, I read an article about Leon Lederman, 92, that really made me pause.
Lederman, along with two other scientists, received the 1988 Nobel Prize for discovering a subatomic particle.
He said it was just collecting dust.
His wife mentioned a more practical reason for the sale.
They faced financial uncertainty when Lederman was diagnosed with dementia, and the $756,000 they received for the pure gold medal made them more financially secure.
A gold medal doesn't hold the sentimental value of a home.
A story that made headlines in May of this year was about a former Japanese prisoner of war who needed 24-hour care after being diagnosed with dementia.
This story could have taken place in the USA, and probably has.
This particular article took place in Cornwall and affected ninety-four-year-old Charles Atkins.
His family said the government was "throwing him on the scrapheap."  The dilemma for the family was that unless he sold his home, his two daughters were responsible for his expensive care.
Can't happen here, you say?
Twenty-eight states have filial responsibility laws where adult children can be forced to provide necessities for their indigent parents, including long-term care.
Most states don't enforce these laws, yet.
As the crunch becomes tighter for state assistance, they may begin to close their own financial gap.
In most states, this involves civil court action, but twelve states impose criminal penalties and three states allow both civil and criminal.
Of course, if you are like me, you want the best care for your parents.
Unfortunately, the enormous cost of nursing home care could force middle-class Americans into bankruptcy in a hurry.
It's a sticky situation, and if selling the family home gets you and Uncle Sam off the hook, it may seem the lesser evil.
Yes, Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease in America, and it looks like it is only going to become five times more costly by 2050.
This just puts the exclamation point behind the statement, "End Alzheimer's now!" Without a cure for Alzheimer's, the government and families are going to be faced with the unfaceable, the impossible, the unimaginable.
There is "Hope for Alzheimer's." Science is making great strides toward finding an effective treatment for Alzheimer's and ultimately a cure.
We need to keep pestering our legislators!
If each of us helps in the fight to end Alzheimer's through awareness, persistence, and downright refusing to give up, we can make a difference.
A big, life-changing difference.
Copyright (c) June 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, June 5, 2015>
Purple is my favorite color, and coincidentally, it is the Alzheimer's movement color too.
June is Alzheimer's and Brain Awareness Month and an ideal time to deck out in purple.
I signed the purple pledge and changed my Facebook profile photo to the "END ALZ" logo.
The pledge is to wear purple gear on June 21, the Longest Day, and throughout the month of June.
The "Longest Day" ties well to Alzheimer's.
As any caregiver can attest, some days are not just long--they are endless.
Alzheimer's is an equal opportunity disease affecting people like you and me and creeping into the ranks of the famous.
It was interesting to see that the cast of  "The Big Bang Theory" have joined the fight against Alzheimer's.
Along with other well-known celebrities, they performed at "A Night at Sardi's" to benefit Alzheimer's.
They were joined by Joey McIntyre, singer/songwriter and a member of New Kids on the Block.
The fight is personal to Joey since his mother recently lost her battle with Alzheimer's.
He said, "Mourning is a process, and I have to take my time with it." Alzheimer's can bring families together, and it can tear them apart.
Or both.
When Glen Campbell announced he had Alzheimer's, his family was admired for the way they rallied around him.
Due to his family's support, Glen was able to perform well after he had the disease.
Eventually, he wound up in long-term care.
Now the family is at odds with his fourth and present wife, Kim.
His children from previous marriages claim Kim Campbell has barred them from seeing their father, failing to provide Glenn with basic personal care items, and being financially irresponsible.
Some of his children are trying to get a judge to appoint a guardian to protect his interests.
Often family members disagree on how to provide excellent care for the individual with Alzheimer's.
They fuss and fight, and before you know it, they become more focused on having their own way than what is really and truly the best resolution to their quandary.
The more you learn about the disease, the more likely you are to make good decisions.
The primary care partner will experience a different level of stress and angst than the occasional visitor.
Until you walk in their shoes, be very, very careful about criticizing.
This isn't to say that everyone is cut out to be a caregiver.
Some aren't.
Unless you are willing and able to step in full-time, proceed with caution.
As long as your loved one is not in danger or neglected, be supportive.
Be a part of the solution instead of adding to the problems.
Share your stories, your experiences, and show your support for caregivers and people with the disease.
Create awareness with the color purple!
My goal is to wear purple every day in June.
This is an easy goal for me since I have a wardrobe rich in purple, even without considering all the purple walk shirts I've accumulated over the years.
Just in case I get up and forget to don my Alzheimer's gear, my fingernails and toenails are both polished purple.
My toenails have the addition of a layer of sparkle.
Sparkle on the nails makes them look darned cool, but it is a real chore to remove it.
That's when I have to drag out the super-duper polish remover pads and sometimes finish with a bottle of remover.
If only we could remove Alzheimer's from the face of the earth as if it were a thin layer of polish!
We want to turn the world purple in support of the 47 million people worldwide who are living with dementia.
By being an advocate, a supporter, and raising awareness, the brain you save may be your own.
GoPurple and #ENDALZ--not just for June, but for a lifetime.
Copyright (c) June 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com Take the pledge at www.alz.org! 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, May 27, 2015>
Sometimes I'm in the right place at the right time to hear a message that resonates with me.
That message may be at a high-priced conference in some exotic locale, or it could be in my hometown during one of Pastor Jim Downing's sermons.
Sunday morning, he prefaced his sermon with the thought that it might be one of the most important messages he would ever give.
I don't remember his exact words, but he gave his self-depreciating smile, and said we might be thinking, "Nice words, preacher" and just go on our way and side-step the importance of the message.
His message was based on Ecclesiastes 4:6 "Better one handful with tranquility than two handfuls with toil and chasing after the wind." We seem to think that more is better, but is it?
When I was growing up in a family of eight, we learned that it wasn't necessary to have a lot of material possessions to get by.
Mom and Dad bought us school supplies and clothes at the beginning of the year.
I had a few dresses to wear and one pair of school shoes.
We always had the box of sixteen crayons, not the giant boxes some of the other kids had.
Funny thing was, I still received the same education.
I had two dolls and not a lot of other toys.
Mom always saw that I had books to read.
She ordered a children's version of Reader's Digest Condensed Books.
Through those books, the world of adventure opened to me.
One of the first stories I read was "Little House in the Big Woods." I loved it!
I was reading about a girl like me that didn't have much, but enjoyed every moment of being a kid.
After I became a grownup, my life has run the gamut from lying awake at night trying to figure out how we were going to pay the bills to the abundance of today.
I worked more than three decades to be able to afford enough clothing to outfit a small nation and enough shoes to earn the nickname Imelda Marcos Junior.
I have collections to the point of almost having collections of collections.
Which brings us to the first of three of Pastor Jim's suggestions, "throw out." I've been doing some of that with bags of clothes and shoes I've taken to Open Door.
I know I have to get more serious about paring down on the overload of material possessions.
Pastor Jim hasn't channeled into my internal self, so obviously, I'm not the only one with a crazy busy schedule.
My calendar is often double or triple booked.
I'm so over stretched that I have reminders of my reminders.
"Cut back," he said.
Cut back on schedules.
If I look through my calendar I can see things I want to do, but those are often pushed aside for something I feel obligated to do.
I'm retired but, by golly, that doesn't seem to give me a lot more time.
My days are full and often hectic.
I haven't found time to write for months and months.
Not.
One.
Story.
Perhaps, part of my time crunch comes from the interruptions of emails, phone calls, social media, Google, and that feeling of constantly being connected.
Let's face it...if I forget my phone on a simple trip to town, I'll turn around and get it.
My smart phone is like carrying a home office with me everywhere I go.
It dings, buzzes, and even whistles at me.
"Turn off," Pastor Jim said.
He has a really good point.
How do you relax when you are at the beck and call of, well, just about everyone?
Not only people you know, but also people you don't know.
How the heck did that happen?
By de-cluttering our lives, we have more time to enjoy life's breathtaking moments.
We have time to look at a beautiful sunset and admire the way the clouds form in the sky.
I remember my brother Donnie and I playing, "What does that cloud look like?" We saw angels, ships, faces, and all kinds of goofy things in the clouds.
Now if I look at a cloud, I might see the possibility of rain, but it's been years since I studied the clouds and tried to picture an object.
I've been under the misguided notion that's just the way life is now-a-days.
It doesn't have to be.
Is it possible for me to throw out, cut back, and turn off?
I've been much too busy chasing the wind to enjoy a mere handful of tranquility.
Copyright (c) May 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 22, 2015>
My granddaughter is on the track team of a small school that doesn't have their own track.
When she decided to jump in addition to running, she watched a You-Tube video and practiced in the yard.
It took a real leap of faith for her to try her skill at a track meet.
Last year, she advanced to Sectional in the triple jump, and she was determined to do the same this year.
At Districts this year, she placed third in triple jump and long jump.
A storm lurked behind dark clouds on the day of Sectionals.
Her goal at Sectionals was to place in the top four and advance to State.
After the long jump, she was disappointed because her jumps were short of her personal best, and it didn't look like she would advance.
The skies opened up and a torrential rain sent us to the truck and her to the athletes' tent.
After the downpour, she jumped the triple jump and, although she placed better than last year, she clearly wasn't in the top four.
She wasn't really open to hearing she'd done her best, or how proud of her we were, or "there's always next year." We left after her events and by the time we stopped in town for pizza, she was feeling better.
Track season was over for the year.
She'd had a great year, so her leap of faith to compete had paid off.
It got me to thinking about when a leap of faith is personally beneficial.
#1.
When failure, or even humiliation, is possible.
When I decided to start my Early Onset Alzheimer's blog, doubts churned in my mind.
Did I have anything of interest to say and would anyone read it?
Would I have mistakes in it that people would criticize?
Would I get hate mail?
Negative images almost kept me from pushing the post button that first time.
Once I made the decision to move forward, I never looked back.
It is obvious that success is not possible without a chance of failure, and failure can be humiliating.
It's moving beyond the fear that lets us know the thrill of accomplishing our goals.
#2.
To follow your dream.
My dream was to write.
Little did I know when I was clacking out fiction stories on a manual typewriter that the future would hold many ways of publishing my work.
Eventually, the time came when the mechanics of writing became about a thousand percent easier and publishing as easy as pushing the "post" button.
Not everyone wants to be a writer, but almost everyone has a dream they want to follow.
What's yours?
Take a leap of faith and go for it!
#3.
Leave a dead end situation.
We've all been there.
The job that went nowhere.
The relationship that caused more harm than good, or was downright scary.
It is really hard to leave the known for the unknown, but given the correct circumstances, it can be life changing.
I once had a job working for a family business.
It wasn't all bad, at first.
I liked what I was doing but as the married couple's relationship went south, conditions became unbearable.
I needed a job so I stayed even after I began to dread going to work each day.
I was forced into leaving the dead end situation when they sold the business.
Thankfully, the demise of the company forced me into the job market and launched a life-long career at a job I loved.
#4.
Keep improbable from being impossible.
I dropped out of college when I married Jim.
Finally, when my children began school, I returned to our local junior college to earn a two-year degree.
Still, I always regretted not getting my bachelor's degree, and the older I got, the more improbable it became that it was going to happen.
The opportunity to get a degree came at a really bad time.
I was working full-time, Jim was in the nursing home, and I was already squeezing in time to volunteer for the Alzheimer's Association.
Although the situation seemed impossible, I entered an eighteen-month cohort program offered by William Woods University.
I graduated in 2005, easily the oldest student in our class.
Was it worth it?
You bet it was.
Taking a leap of faith doesn't always pan out, but not taking it strips you of the sweet taste of success.
Oh, during that downpour at the track meet, we missed the announcement of the long jump winners.
My granddaughter's coach collected her medal and gave her the good news that evening that she had advanced to State.
Will she win a medal at State?
Maybe, maybe not, but without taking that leap of faith she would have never had the opportunity or experience.
Copyright (c) May 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 14, 2015>
When you name your company after the highest mountain in North America, you know you have great expectations.
A new company, Denali Therapeutics, has taken on the challenge of finding a cure for neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's.
Their task is formidable, and that is the reason they chose Denali for their name.
The former Genetech researchers began their venture with an astounding $217 million.
Denali's chairman of the board, Dr. Marc Tessier-Lavigne, believes that the time is right for breakthrough treatments for neurodegenerative diseases.
This group of scientists plan to break away from the study of drugs to block beta-amyloid.
Their focus will be on genetics, which has led to effective drugs for cancer.
Scientists have discovered new genes linked to brain diseases such as Alzheimer's, ALS, and Parkinson's.
They believe these "degenogenes" will lead to a better outcome than previous drug studies.
Hallelujah!
How often have you heard that if you keep trying the same thing you'll have the same outcome?
Alzheimer's research is at an impasse.
No one has found the illusive cure, or even a good treatment for the disease.
It is time to try a complete new approach and these seem like just the guys to do it.
The company is looking at brain inflammation and the substances that develop between brain cells.
They are concentrating on the factors that cause brain cells to die when a person develops a brain disease.
They are already looking at twelve drug targets!
The brightest brains in the world have banded together to tackle the most baffling disease left to conquer.
Now, they hope to engage the Food and Drug Administration in fast tracking brain drugs for Alzheimer's as they did for HIV and other diseases.
Today I'm wearing a tee-shirt that says, "Your brain contains about 100 billion nerve cells.
Each One is Worth Keeping Around." I want to keep as many of those precious cells as I can.
Don't you?
Copyright (c) May 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com sources: http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/denali-therapeutics-launches-with-initial-investment-to-discover-and-develop-treatments-for-neurodegenerative-diseases-300083259.html http://www.forbes.com/sites/matthewherper/2015/05/14/former-genentech-researchers-raise-217-million-for-company-to-fight-alzheimers-and-parkinsons/
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 8, 2015>
Several years ago, I went through piles of papers from my various volunteer organizations and threw them into different totes.
This was a haphazard way of sorting them and was much quicker than making file folders and filing them away.
Besides, at the time, my file space was quite limited so that may not have been an option.
Today, I sorted through the Alzheimer's tote.
It was quite an interesting assortment of papers.
The first task at hand was to sort into three piles: recycle, burn, and file.
I quickly pared down the amount of information to keep to a smaller stack.
In the Alzheimer's box, I found articles that I thought were lost forever.
I found the article about my friend, Karen Henley, published in Newsday Magazine.
Karen was caring for her forty-two-year-old husband Mike, who had familial early-onset Alzheimer's disease.
Her story is one of courage, perseverance, and most of all, love.
I found an article that made me smile.
My friend, David Oliver, was one of the researchers who biked in the Alzheimer's Breakthrough Ride.
I met him when we both served on the local Alzheimer's chapter board of directors.
He had joined the cross-country ride (San Francisco to D.C.) for the segment from Sedalia to Jefferson City.
I drove into town early for the send off.
David and four others took the scenic route to Jefferson City.
David was dedicated to go above and beyond to further Alzheimer's research funding.
David passed away from cancer in March.
It was especially touching to see this article and remember his wonderful sense of humor and optimistic outlook on life.
I found several years of Advocate's Guides and Facts and Figures from some of the fifteen Advocacy Forums I've attended over the years.
I go through these two books each year to see what we've accomplished and what we need to tackle.
They serve as a valuable resource for me.
Of course, I had several folders of Alzheimer's Walks, previously known as "Memory Walks." I was able to pitch a lot of old forms.
At one time, we had to make our own!
I spent hours developing signup sheets for team captains and posters for events.
It's much easier now that the Alzheimer's Association and the chapter have everything online and with a few clicks, we can download and print any report, form, or poster we need.
Then to top it off, there's always the odd pieces of information.
Prints of the airline tickets for one of the years my granddaughter went to D.C. with me.
I found a stub from the Smithsonian and a map of the Old Town Trolley.
I pitched an outdated congressional book.
Tucked in among the Alzheimer's papers were a few from Sedalia Business Women.
Oops, guess that was in the wrong box entirely.
That one is still intact.
Who knows, when I go through it I might find more Alzheimer's memorabilia.
It's kind of sad to look back at years and years of events that have come and gone.
I'm happy to say my passion for Alzheimer's advocacy is still alive.
I'm just looking forward to the day when it is no longer necessary and Alzheimer's is eradicated.
Copyright (c) May 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 30, 2015>
At the first Alzheimer's Memory Walk I coordinated, a reporter from a local radio station placed a recorder beneath my chin, and asked, "What is Alzheimer's?" When he had asked for an interview, I expected him to ask what our financial goal was for the walk, why I was personally involved, what the money was used for, who our sponsors were, what it was like to be a caregiver, or even why purple was the "official" color.
For some reason, it never occurred to me that he would ask me to define Alzheimer's disease.
I believe my answer was, "Alzheimer's is an incurable degenerative brain disease that affects memory and a person's ability to perform daily tasks." Alzheimer's is not an easily defined disease.
Even if you give a textbook, or dictionary, definition, it falls so far short of the scope of the disease that you might as well describe a malignant brain tumor as "a headache." Yes, official definitions might give a clinical description that says "a general term for memory loss and other intellectual abilities serious enough to interfere with daily life." I'm not so sure that this disease "interferes with" daily life so much as it replaces life with a new reality.
You go to a place where nothing is the way it had been, and you know it never will be the same.
It is important to know what Alzheimer's does to the brain; otherwise, you will expect the impossible.
Without the knowledge that the brain is deteriorating, it is too easy to believe that someone is being willfully stubborn or "pretending" they cannot remember.
In 1906, Dr. Alois Alzheimer, a German psychiatrist and neuropathologist, had a fifty-one-year-old patient, Auguste Deter, who died after she exhibited odd behavior and suffered from memory loss.
During the autopsy of her brain, Dr. Alzheimer discovered shrinking of the cortex, and the presence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.
Amyloid plaques and tau tangles became the hallmark of Alzheimer's disease.
Most research centered on ways to rid the brain of amyloid plaques.
More recently, researchers at Mayo Clinic have focused on tau.
The study's lead author, Neuroscientist Melissa Murray, Ph.D, in Brain described the role of tau as "railroad ties that stabilize a train track that brain cells use to transport food, messages and other vital cargo throughout neurons." She described tau as "the driver of Alzheimer's." As research moves closer to unlocking the mystery of Alzheimer's, it is important to note only 45% of those with Alzheimer's, or their caregivers, report being told of the diagnosis.
This compares to 90% of people with cancer and cardiovascular disease knowing their condition.
Why is it so important to know of an Alzheimer's diagnosis since the disease is incurable and has no treatment to slow the progression?
I know from experience that crucial decisions need to be made while the person with the disease can help make them.
It is important to get finances in order and to put in place medical and financial durable power of attorney documents.
Knowing the diagnosis will also help families connect with community resources.
The video attached to this blog explains how Alzheimer's affects the brain.
To know how it affects lives and hearts, talk to a person with the disease or a caregiver.
They are all too familiar with the daily challenges that truly define the disease.
Copyright (c) April 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 16, 2015>
April is a month that makes me think of death and taxes.
April 15 came with alarming speed, and for the first time in a decade, I filed a joint return.
Of course, we used a handy-dandy program to plug in the numbers.
But what can I say, other than taxes are a little bit complicated.
Bottom line turned up a shocking sum that I owed in taxes.
Even paying what I thought was an unreasonable amount of quarterly estimated taxes throughout 2014, I wound up in debt to the IRS and to the state of Missouri.
Now, to prepare for the current year.
Last year's estimated taxes were only about a third of this year's amount.
Ouch!
For all my complaints about taxes, I feel fortunate that I have a great retirement plan.
What is it they say about death and taxes?
April is also the month that hurts my heart.
Jim left this world April 18, ten years ago.
A decade.
It doesn't seem possible that it could be that long ago when I remember that day so plainly.
Funny, how the more you want to forget something, the less likely you are to do it.
The only positive thing I can say about Jim's death is that it gave me back the man I knew before dementia.
During the years struggling in the grip of the disease, it came to a point where the person he was faded, and he became a different person.
In order to make it through that tough time, I refused to compare who he was to who he had been.
It was easier to accept the unacceptable changes and love him "as is." After Jim's death, I eventually was able to embrace the man he was before the disease.
I could smile at old photos and memories before the dark days of dementia.
I could remember our Colorado vacations, our trips to Oregon, and our big adventure of building our own home.
So many good memories outweigh the sad times.
Life is a balance: good and bad, smiles and tears, joy and pain.
You can't fully appreciate one without the other.
If you were never sad, you wouldn't appreciate being happy.
Part of the wonder of life is that we don't know what is going to happen the next day.
Life can change in a heartbeat.
Our world can turn upside down and it may take years, or decades, for it to righten again.
Ben Franklin said that death and taxes were the only two certain things in life.
As for taxes, I guess, it means we do have income, and we can be thankful for that.
It's hard to find much good to say about death, unless we can say we lived fully until that time.
Jim lived fully until dementia made that impossible.
On April 18, I want to remember Jim's life and not his death.
I want to remember his laugh, his corny jokes, and most of all, his loving heart.
Copyright (c) April 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 8, 2015>
You've always heard of fighting like dogs and cats, so Harold was concerned when the stray kitten showed up on our doorstep.
It was a little worse for wear: tail torn off and bloody back legs.
The kitten was dehydrated and hungry.
What else can you do when a teeny kitten refuses to leave, but just sits there mewing much louder than you'd think possible?
Enter Neptune into the household ruled by Lucy.
Just a short year before, Lucy had wormed her way into our hearts in the exact same manner--a stray who took up residence.
Harold was worried that Lucy wouldn't like the cat.
I introduced them by letting them touch noses, and they had many staring contests.
The cat stayed on the front porch, and Lucy was queen of the deck.
Cats being curious, Neptune eventually approached the deck.
At first, the dog barked and Neptune backed away.
That didn't last long.
Soon Neptune was darting in front of Lucy and scooting behind the grill.
"The cat shouldn't be on the deck," Harold said as he shooed Neptune away.
A few minutes later, the cat slid through the rail to venture on the deck again.
After a few weeks, Lucy quit barking at the cat and they declared a truce.
The cat took over Lucy's bed, and Lucy would lie beside it and nose Neptune.
Sometimes they got a little rowdy, but neither seemed to be scared of the other.
While I was gone to the Alzheimer's Forum, Harold said, "The cat is going to have to go.
They mock fight and one of them is going to get hurt." I don't believe he was worried so much about Lucy hurting Neptune as he was about Neptune scratching Lucy.
By the time I got home, he had to show me how they acted.
When he took Lucy for a walk in the backyard, the cat went down the steps side-by-side with the dog.
Then, the cat ran up a tree, only to sidle down and launch a sneak attack.
All was quiet when we were inside.
On the surveillance camera, we saw them lying together on the same chair while four other chairs remained unoccupied.
Now, Lucy prances about each morning anxious to go onto the deck to play with her unlikely friend.
It seems that throughout life, we all have unlikely friends.
At the Forum each year, I look forward to spending quality time with my two friends, Kathy Siggins and Sarah Harris.
It's an unlikely friendship when you consider that Sarah lives in Virginia, Kathy in Maryland, and I live in Missouri.
Our friendship is never diminished from spending time away and when we meet at the Forum, we haven't missed a beat.
The Forum is like a special homecoming of the heart.
We all lost our husbands to an Alzheimer's type of dementia.
We met at the Forum and had an immediate connection.
Now, it would be hard to imagine my life without them.
These serendipitous friendships are promises that nothing is really random.
No matter what happens, we will meet the people we are supposed to meet and fulfill the purpose we were born to accomplish.
"If it hadn't been for Alzheimer's," Sarah said, "we would have never met." This is an undeniable truth.
Our adversities defined our strengths and shaped our souls allowing us to embrace our unlikely friendship.
Copyright (c) April 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 30, 2015>
I joined 1,100 other focused and dedicated advocates in Washington, D.C., to take our message to Capitol Hill.
As always a highlight for me is to meet my long-term (fifteen years!)
friends, and sisters of the heart, Sarah Harris and Kathy Siggins.
This is the one time each year we get together, talking non-stop until we get caught up.
Once we enter the forum, we're focused on the message.
The first training session for ambassadors began immediately following lunch on Monday.
The program began with an exercise.
Everyone was asked to shout his or her name.
Of course, the result was a loud, indecipherable noise.
Yet when everyone whispered in unison "Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease in America," it was easily understood.
This demonstrated the impact of everyone being on the same page and delivering the same message.
Our mission was for Alzheimer's advocates to deliver our federal priorities to our senators and representatives.
1.
Increase the commitment to Alzheimer's research by $300 million.
The current level of investment is $586 million.
Even with the increase, this amount is far short of the $2 billion annual estimate to implement the steps toward meeting the goal of a cure or effective treatment as set forth by the National Alzheimer's Plan.
2.
Co-sponsor the Hope for Alzheimer's Act.
During the Forum, the Act was re-introduced with a focus on care planning and documentation of medical records.
This act is consistent with the National Alzheimer's Plan    The cost of caring for individuals with Alzheimer's is a staggering $226 billion.
One in every five Medicare dollars is spent on people with Alzheimer's disease.
These numbers will only continue to increase as the baby boomers age.
By 2050, the cost of Alzheimer's care is expected to reach $1.1 trillion per year.
The only way to avoid this pending economic crisis is to find an effective treatment or cure for Alzheimer's disease.
Research today is exciting and we seem to be on the cusp of finding the key to unlock the elusive cure for Alzheimer's.
New studies have shown great promise.
New technology allows scientists to see beta amyloid plaques and tau tangles in living brains.
Now, the effectiveness of treatments can be measured through this imaging.
A breakout session on social media showed us how to use tools provided by the Association to share highlights of the session via social media--Twitter and Facebook.
We participated in a "Thunderclap" that released hundreds of tweets and Facebook posts as we began our Hill visits.
The Association also re-tweeted any tweets containing #ALZFORUM or #ENDALZ.
During the National Alzheimer's Dinner, tweets were displayed on the screens, including several of mine.
All fifty states were represented during the roll call of the states.
The most poignant moment during the roll call was an advocate accompanied by his wife who had Alzheimer's.
My heart went out to both of them.
Dr. David Satcher, former U.S.
Surgeon General presented the keynote.
He focused on leadership and teamwork.
He said, "everyone teaches and everyone learns." Dr. Satcher  said, "Leadership is like a relay race." It doesn't just depend on how fast you run, but whether you have the baton at the finish line.
"If you drop the baton, the race is over." He read a poem his wife, Nola, had written for their wedding reception, "I've Never Been Here Before." Nola was diagnosed with Alzheimer's fifteen years ago giving a new meaning to the poem.
Periodically, throughout the meeting, advocates and people with dementia would tell why they were advocates.
The most delightful person to speak was Amy Shives.
She said she was diagnosed at fifty, as was her mother, with dementia of the Alzheimer's type--atypical.
She never considered herself to be typical anyway.
She said that people with Alzheimer's did not like to be called "sufferers" because they are people, not the disease.
"If you've met one person with Alzheimer's; you've met one person with Alzheimer's." Amy said that now she could wear her new shoes even if they don't match her dress.
Her first dog, Chester, alerts her when she is going to have seizures.
She freely admitted that her cat doesn't care.
Her husband, George, is her care partner and she loves him more than ever.
Amy is being considered for an appointment to next year's Alzheimer's Association Board of Directors.
Lisa Genova, author of Still Alice, received the Sargent and Eunice Shriver Profiles in Dignity Award.
Lisa was at the 2008 Alzheimer's Forum speaking to an early stage group and selling her self-published book.
I bought a book from Lisa during that long-ago Forum prepared to be disappointed.
Boy, was I ever wrong!
I was so impressed by Still Alice that when a student I was mentoring wanted to know what Alzheimer's book to review, I recommended Still Alice.
The book was later published by Simon & Schuster and spent 40 weeks on the New York Times bestseller list and sold 2.1 million copies in 30 different languages.
The movie, starring Julianne Moore, has followed a circuitous route to become an acclaimed movie co-produced by  Elizabeth Gelfand Stearns, chair of the Judy Fund, who read the book in one night.
On Wednesday, we stormed Capitol Hill.
Jessie Kwatamdia, Marcia Rauwerdink, and I along with other advocates visited Senator Blunt and Claire McCaskill's offices.
We three then visited with Congresswoman Hartzler, where we received a warm reception.
After our visits, Jessie and I attended the Senate Hearing on the Fight Against Alzheimer's, Senator Susan Collins, chair, and  Claire McCaskill, ranking member.
Missouri advocate Kim Stemley, a young caregiver for her mother, gave a powerful, on-point testimony.
The influence of 1,100 dedicated advocates, wearing purple sashes, each delivering the same message, punctuated with personal stories, leaves a lasting impression on our legislators.
Collectively, we are influential, but we are unstoppable as individuals who advocate throughout the year.
I am thankful to once again be part of this group and look forward to returning for my sixteenth Advocacy Forum April 4 - 6, 2016, to make sure our voices are not forgotten.
Copyright (c) March 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 21, 2015>
Spring is finally here and I'm packing for my fifteenth annual trip to Washington, D.C. It's that time of year again when Alzheimer's advocates converge on Capitol Hill to deliver our message to Congress.
For the first time in several years, I'll be making the trip alone.
My good friends Kathy and Sarah will be spending one night with me.
We've never done that before and I can just imagine it will be a blast with not much sleeping going on.
With the way my flights are, my free time is broken up into smaller chunks so I'm not sure how many of the wonderful historic sites I'll get to visit this time.
Our hotel is in the Woodley Park area so we're quite a distance from the sites other than the Zoo.
Of course, an entrance to the metro is just a short distance away so I imagine that will be my direct route to the monuments and museums.
Of course, I'm not there to be a tourist.
I'm there to take on the serious business of advocating for Alzheimer's funding.
Research news is really exciting right now.
Alzheimer's is a global problem and researchers are working worldwide to find a cure.
A new study from Australia has shown reversal of Alzheimer's in animal models.
Scientist used focused therapeutic ultrasound to beam noninvasive sound waves into the brain.
This therapy worked on 75 percent of the mice, restoring memory, but not damaging surrounding tissue.
That sounds totally awesome!
At least it's awesome for the mice, but folks, it makes you wonder how long it will be before it becomes available for our loved ones.
This therapy will eventually be tried on "higher" animal models, such as sheep.
Human trials could be underway as soon as 2017.
These trials may start small, and perhaps in Australia.
It's not surprising that this news comes from Australia.
In 2004, they were the first country to adopt a national Alzheimer's plan.
We didn't adopt our plan until eight years later.
Scientists are exploring several avenues now that show good results in mice ranging from a special diet to drugs that restore the immune system to normal so it can rid the brain of beta-amyloid plaque.
Research is costly which brings me back to the reason to go to D.C. Our country is hard hit with Alzheimer's disease which happens to be the most costly disease in America.
Yet, we spend only 1% of the cost of the disease on research.
We need to increase the investment in Alzheimer's research in order to meet our goal of a cure or effective treatment by 2025.
So my bag is packed and I leave early, early in the morning to make my flight.
This time tomorrow, I'll be in D.C. preparing for a whirlwind of preparation for our Hill visits on Wednesday.
We will spring into action and shout from the Hill: We want to End Alzheimer's Now.
Copyright (c) March 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, March 13, 2015>
Last weekend, I had the privilege of speaking at the Business Women of Missouri legislative conference on Alzheimer's legislation.
A women's group is an ideal audience for a topic of Alzheimer's.
Two-thirds of those stricken with the disease are women.
In addition, women are two times more likely to be the caregiver for a loved one with the disease.
Spouses and daughters make up the majority of the female care partners, but in younger onset, a mother may be a caregiver.
In Jim's case, his mom took care of him while I worked.
Her failing health and the progression of the disease left me scrambling for other relatives and professional caregivers.
Bless my mom, sister, sons, and in-laws for being the village that helped me keep him at home longer.
It seems that everywhere I go, I run into others who know the heartbreak of Alzheimer's.
Folks tend to share their experiences with me.
Or their concerns.
Often, I see the concern when the horrible suspicion takes hold that something is terribly wrong with a loved one.
From my experience, I completely understand the urgency of wanting to find out what is wrong, and the fear that the doctor will say, "dementia" or "dementia of the Alzheimer's type." First, before panic sets in, take your loved one for a complete medical and psychological workup.
I believe that nothing would have been more devastating to me than to find out, too late, that something could have been done to help Jim, and we hadn't started proper treatment.
Some treatable conditions can mimic Alzheimer's.
Also, psychological testing can measure the level of cognition.
I was stunned to learn that Jim had dementia after a battery of psychological testing.
Simple things baffled him: he couldn't count backwards from ten, he couldn't come up with any words that started with the letter a, and he couldn't perform simple math.
Abstract thinking was beyond his capabilities.
Jim's follow-up MRI detected brain shrinkage.
We ran out of other reasons for his problems.
Alzheimer's is an insidious disease.
It sabotages lives and steals the future.
It predictably moves throughout the brain, relentlessly destroying brain cells.
Caregivers can become frustrated when they hear the same question or phrase, repeatedly.
They can become annoyed with repetitive behavior.
Jim folded paper towels, dozens of them, and stuffed them into his pockets.
He paced.
And paced.
And paced right out the door and down the road.
"It's just the disease," I told myself.
I told others the same thing when they couldn't understand why Jim did some of the things he did.
Knowing it's the disease, does help.
"If Jim had a broken leg, would people expect him to walk?" my mom reasoned.
"Well, he has a broken brain, and no one can expect him to do the things he used to do." When Jim was in the early stages of the disease, I think some people believed I was the problem.
I saw little things, subtle changes that it took another year for others to see.
Now I see others beginning that journey, hoping it isn't Alzheimer's.
They notice differences that may not be obvious to anyone else.
I don't know how many times I've heard, "Oh, my uncle doesn't have Alzheimer's!
He can remember everything that happened when he was a boy." Yes.
We grasp at straws and hang onto denial for as long as possible.
If he can't remember where the bathroom is in his own house, or drives to town and can't find his way home, or forgets his children's names, it's time to drop the denial and investigate.
We fear nothing as much as the unknown.
And everywhere I go, I find people who begin to have that nagging doubt that gnaws at the pit of their stomachs, that someone they love is developing dementia.
My heart aches for each of them.
My prayers plead for them to be strong, because strong is the only choice if their fears become the ugly reality of Alzheimer's.
My hugs convey my hope that until science ends Alzheimer's they will make the most of the time they've been given.
My dream is that someday, everywhere I go, I won't know anybody with Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) March 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 5, 2015>
Last week I opened a box of photos and found a hodgepodge of  memories packed inside.
I had stashed miscellaneous photos in this box and the memories spanned decades--many decades.
I started sorting the loose photos into labeled envelopes with hopes that eventually I could find a specific photo when I wanted.
I began the task of labeling photos and trying to date them.
Some were still in the envelopes from the various places where I had them developed.
Although I didn't take the time to label the photos, I often put the place and year on the outside.
As I shuffled through them, I was reminded of happy times, family reunions, vacations, and get-togethers.
I was searching for a photo for an Alzheimer's presentation I'm giving this weekend, and in addition to the box, I sifted through thousands of photos on my computer.
I was amazed at how many of the digital photos I didn't remember taking.
I've finally started organizing my digital photos by putting them in folders by subject and by year.
It does make it easier to find that one photo I'm looking for to jog a memory, savor a moment, or for a brief wallow in nostalgia.
As I've gotten older, I've discovered how important it is to have these mementos.
Too many people are gone before we're ready.
Too often family moves across country, and our paths won't cross for years or decades at a time.
Or maybe we won't meet again on this side of heaven.
Rare old photographs are meant to be enjoyed and shared.
Poor families have fewer photos than wealthier ones.
You not only had to buy a camera, you had to purchase film, and then pay to have it developed.
Sometimes the process took months if you hadn't taken the entire roll of film.
Or, you'd put it aside and forgot to have the photos developed.
When that happened, photos often had a strange cast to them.
It seemed like in every group photo at least one person was looking away, talking, or had her eyes shut.
I know my mother-in-law lost a lot of her family photos in a fire.
Those irreplaceable images are gone forever.
What a different world it was then.
My hairdresser and I were talking about the numerous "selfies" people take today.
She was wondering why her daughter had to have so many pictures of herself.
Well, let's face it.
The younger you are, the better the photos turn out.
At my age, I prefer to have my hair fixed and my makeup on.
It doesn't help to be dressed in something that makes me look like a baby elephant.
It's hard to look trim in photos when you aren't in real life.
But let's face it--there's good photos and not so good ones.
This morning when I was organizing some of my digital photos, I saw one Harold took of me with my new camera.
I didn't have a speck of makeup on, and in high quality digital, you can see every flaw on my face.
I almost deleted it, and then decided what the heck, it wouldn't look bad at all with a little Photoshop magic.
It is so easy to scan or take a photograph and share within seconds on Facebook.
As I've uncovered some of the treasures in the box of pictures, my first thought was to share them with family members.
I love looking at old photos others share on "Throwback Thursday." The photos make me smile--sometimes through tears--but a big smile, just the same.
I'm so glad that I have thousands of digital and prints of people, places, and memories.
Photos are slices of life--precious moments frozen in time.
Copyright (c) March 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 23, 2015>
Rep. Dean Dohrman, Linda Fisher, Ginger Dollinger On a cold February morning, Ginger and I joined other Missouri advocates for Memory Day at the state Capitol.
With the temperatures in the teens and wind chills below zero, we made the trek from the parking garage to the Capitol building basement.
That was a great place to enter the building since the cafeteria was close by and a hot cup of coffee helped take off the chill.
I found my cousin, Karen, and her lobbying partner at what they called their "office." This was a perfect area to see everyone that entered the building.
Ginger and I joined them and while we enjoyed our coffee, we received our first lucky break of the day.
My cousin had a place for us to leave our coats.
How great to not have to lug them around.
"Usually when we get here," I told her, "we have this big discussion as to whether it's cold enough that we have to wear our coats.
That wasn't an option this morning." Soon, the Alzheimer's group passed by, and we discovered that we were now meeting in Hearing  Ginger Dollinger Room #2, instead of #3.
We would meet to receive our appointment schedules, leave behind packets, instructions, and don our purple sashes.
Our Springfield group was unable to come because of ice, so our group was smaller than usual.
The Memory Day ceremony had been moved to 2:00 p.m., so for the first time, we had lunch first.
Better yet, we weren't rushed!
Another first: Ginger and I had different representatives.
Since I'd moved a few miles down the road, I was in a new district.
We had two important issues to discuss with our legislators.
Alzheimer's Grants.
We have been fortunate to receive Alzheimer's service grants for many years.
This year we asked for $450,000 to be budgeted for grants that provide respite care for Missourians with Alzheimer's or a related dementia.
This grant has the potential to save the state millions each year.
How is that possible?
Respite often helps caregivers keep loved ones at home longer.
Eight hundred families receive respite from this grant.
Nursing home care costs Medicaid (paid by the state) an average of $147 per day.
Sixty percent of nursing home residents are on Medicaid.
If respite funds delay nursing home placement for Medicaid eligible persons by one month (30 days) the state would save $2,116,800.
The savings alone makes sense!
I delayed nursing home placement by several months with in-home care partially paid with respite funds.
It is impossible to place a value on how much that time meant to us.
Senior Savings Protection Act (SB 244/HB 636).
We all know how on our toes we have to be to avoid being scammed.
People with dementia are even more vulnerable to being exploited.
This bill would allow financial industry professionals to reach out to state agencies and family members if they suspect senior clients are being exploited and to refuse disbursements up to ten days.
Folks, this is so necessary!
Jim had me to run interference for him when telemarketers and others tried to take advantage of him.
Not everyone has a person who can keep track of all the unscrupulous shysters out there that would love nothing better than to tap someone's bank account.
Linda, Ginger, and Rep. Dave Muntzel Our first scheduled visit was to see Ginger's representative, Rep. Dave Muntzel, who until August had been mine.
After our visit with him, we went directly to visit Rep. Dean Dohrman, my representative.
Both representatives seemed to understand the value of both respite funds and the senior protection bill.
After these visits, we split up.
Ginger went to the ceremony, and I accompanied another advocate on his legislative visit.
As soon as our meeting ended, we walked to the second floor rotunda area where Lt.
Governor Peter Kinder was talking about Alzheimer's impact on families and government.
Advocates held flowers representing their connection to the disease.
The program ended with a caregiver's personal story.
I dropped off a packet for our senator and retrieved our coats.
On the drive back to Sedalia, Ginger and I talked about the day, our impressions, our hopes and fears.
It had been a tiring day, but productive.
Being an advocate means being a voice.
Each of us can be a voice to help advance these important issues in Missouri.
Face-to-face meetings make the most difference, but you can lend your support with a letter, phone call, or email.
It just takes a moment, but approval of the $450,000 Alzheimer's Grant could be a lifeline for someone you love and save the state millions at the same time.
The Senior Savings Protection Act could help your grandparents or elderly parents keep their hard-earned savings.
These two issues are a win-win for Missouri residents and taxpayers.
Copyright (c) February 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 13, 2015>
Alzheimer's disease is a looming threat to each of us and to our government.
In fact, it is a triple threat.
Threat #1: Soaring Prevalence.
Every 67 seconds a person in the United States develops Alzheimer's.
More than five million Americans currently are living with Alzheimer's.
As the baby boomers age the prevalence of Alzheimer's will skyrocket.
Left unchecked, we could be looking at 16 million people with the disease by 2050.
Don't know about you, but that darn near scares the bejesus out of me.
Threat #2: Lack of Treatment.
Alzheimer's is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States.
It is the only disease in the top ten without an effective treatment or a cure.
We seem to be headed in the right direction with the Alzheimer's Accountability Act which means the research budget is scientist driven.
The goal is to move toward the National Alzheimer's Plan with its goal of finding an effective treatment or a cure by 2025.
Some recent studies are promising!
Threat #3: Enormous Costs.
Alzheimer's has a reputation for being the most expensive disease for a reason.
It is!
The cost to Medicaid is $37 billion and Medicare is $113 billion, or one in five Medicare dollars.
I can't quite wrap my mind around those staggering numbers.
Families provide an estimated 17.7 billion hours of unpaid care.
In 2014, the out of pocket expense to American families to care for loved ones with Alzheimer's was estimated to be $36 billion.
Additional costs hit family budgets hard.
Even with health insurance and a division of assets that meant Medicaid picked up part of Jim's nursing home, the disease drained our resources.
Jim's Veteran's check and social security check went to the nursing home.
The extras I bought for him cost much more than the $25 a month allowance from his checks.
When faced with a threat, humans have an instinct of either "flight" or "fight." Which do you have?
If you fall into the "flight" camp, you just ignore the disease and figure that it isn't going to happen to you or someone you love.
You don't bother to do anything about it.
Maybe not because you don't care, but you just don't have time, or money, or motivation.
If you are like me, you plan to "fight" with all you have.
You walk the walk and talk the talk.
You participate in Walk to End Alzheimer's, or at least support someone who does, and you become an advocate.
You spread the word and email a legislator from time to time.
You become a "Voice" for Alzheimer's.
Last night I listened to an ambassador call, "Changing the Trajectory of Alzheimer's Disease." The moderators mentioned three ways to help us move the Alzheimer's mission forward.
They called them the three "F's." First, we need Fighters!
These are the Champions who visit, email, call, and generally pester their legislators about Alzheimer's legislation.
They are ambassadors, board members, and volunteers who faithfully give their time and resources.
Second, we need Faces.
A personal story, a picture, or a person in front of a legislator takes the abstract and makes it a reality!
Whether you are visiting your state or U.S. legislators, the most important thing you can bring as an advocate is your story to make it personal and real.
You need to condense the story to keep it on point and brief, but tell it from the heart.
The third part is to share the Facts.
The facts are scary!
The facts are sobering.
You don't have to memorize the facts, but you need to share them.
The best way to lay out the facts is to verbalize a few key facts and leave a handout behind with the details.
We have our work cut out for us if we intend to neutralize the triple threat of Alzheimer's and change the trajectory of the disease.
I hope you choose to join the fight.
Copyright (c) February 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 8, 2015>
Recently Harold and I went on a fifteen day cruise to Hawaii with my brother, his wife, my sister, and her husband.
While at our last port, Kona, my brother said, "I saw something today that I've never seen before on a cruise." Since he is the most seasoned "cruiser" in our family, this statement surprised me.
"I saw them load a body on the boat this morning." He went on to say a hearse came to the pier and picked up the body.
"At least he was living when he died," my sister-in-law said.
"It's a heck of a lot better than laying around in a nursing home waiting to die." This made me think about something my mother said several years ago after Jim developed dementia.
She said, "I'm sure glad that you and Jim didn't put off traveling until retirement." So was I, since retirement was never meant to be for us.
Travel, we did!
Mostly we traveled west--to Oregon, Colorado, Utah, Idaho, New Mexico.
In addition, we expanded our journeys by going south, north, and east--sometimes vacations and, other times, on business trips.
The important thing is that we lived.
Jim always said planning a trip gave him "something to look forward to." His lifestyle growing up was that of a vagabond.
Getting in the car and heading out to a new territory meant adventure.
A new day, a new experience.
When the Fisher family returned to a locale, it was a sense of returning "home" to reunite with friends, family, or the weeping willow tree that grew in the front yard of a house they once lived in.
Either way he was happy.
He was living.
He had many "homes" that resided in his memory and heart.
I, on the other hand, grew up living in one house in a remote area of the Missouri Ozarks.
Travel was not something we did.
Until my senior trip, I had only been out of state one time.
Other than the difference in our traveling experience, Jim and I had a lot in common.
We both came from big families without a lot of material possessions, parents that remained married until death, relatives that played guitars and sang country music, and a love of family.
We both grew up with cousins as our best friends and playmates.
Eventually, we found our groove--living in one area to satisfy me, but traveling to satisfy Jim.
Even after Jim was diagnosed with dementia and traveling became a different kind of adventure, we still managed to revisit the familiar, Colorado and Branson, and to experience new locales--Maine and Nova Scotia.
We continued to live.
If there's one thing I've figured out from our journey into dementia, it is that living is a choice.
When you consider the long-term scope of the disease, the choice to make the best of the time remaining seems more important than ever.
Don't waste the time you are given in the early stages of the disease.
As the disease progresses, adapt.
An adventure may be as simple as a trip to the park or Dairy Queen for a milkshake or taking a wheelchair for a spin around the parking lot.
I can't think of anything more heart-wrenching than watching a loved one's emotions, memories, and skills deteriorate, but the one thing you have is the gift of time.
Although it may seem that time is not your friend when you reach the later stages, it is a gift that people often do not have.
Clutch and cherish those moments.
Choose to live until you die.
Copyright (c) February 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 13, 2015>
Healthline interviewed me for their Facebook page.
Here is that interview: Read about why Linda is participating in the Best Health Blog contest: 1) What inspired you to start blogging?
My husband, Jim, developed dementia at 49 years old.
After a series of tests, the doctor told us that Jim had dementia of the Alzheimer's type.
I knew nothing about Alzheimer's so my first reaction was, "Isn't there medicine for that?"
That was the beginning of the journey where we learned that nothing would slow down the progression of the disease and that it was 100% fatal.
Jim died in 2005, ten years after the diagnosis.
I reached out to the Alzheimer's Association before we had a diagnosis, and they became my lifeline.
I called myself the Alzheimer's Association poster child because I took advantage of every program and service they offered.
I became an Alzheimer's volunteer and advocate as a way of giving back to the Association and extending a helping hand to others who were becoming acquainted with the harsh reality of dementia.
2) What would you do with the money if you won?
I would use the money to help pay expenses to the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum in Washington, D.C. in March.
I'm already registered for the 2015 Forum--my fifteenth consecutive trip to advocate for Alzheimer's research and programs to help care partners cope.
Each year, I join hundreds of other advocates as we don our purple "beauty queen" sashes and storm Capitol Hill.
3) What has been your best blogging moment?
My best blogging moment(s) are when someone tells me they have learned something helpful or found encouragement from one of my posts.
I think my most thrilling moment was when the national Alzheimer's Association featured a story about Jim and me in their online newsletter with a link to my blog.
That was the first time that more than 100 people visited my blog in one day.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 10, 2015>
It is with optimistic caution that I share the latest good news regarding Alzheimer's research from Stanford University.
They may have found the elusive and overdue cure for Alzheimer's disease.
Over the past fifteen years, I've heard exciting news about Alzheimer's research that fizzled out after sailing through preliminary testing.
Is the Stanford University research going to be exception to past experience?
I hope so!
I've always heard that you can't keep doing the same thing and expect a different outcome.
That is one reason that grants are often awarded to researchers who try a new approach to the same problem:  What causes Alzheimer's and how can it be cured?
The hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease are deposits of beta-amyloid plaques between nerve cells and tangles of the protein tau that build up inside cells.
Aging is the number one risk factor for developing the disease, but it is not a normal part of aging.
Alzheimer's is a destructive and always fatal brain disease, currently the sixth leading cause of death in the United States.
Alzheimer's relentlessly progresses from mild symptoms to the final stages requiring constant care.
People with the disease live an average of eight years, but some live twenty years or longer.
Stanford's approach is to boost the brains' own immune response to prevent and cure Alzheimer's.
Researchers at Stanford University School of Medicine discovered that by blocking the protein EP2, microglia cells will continue to cleanse the brain of dangerous beta-amyloid deposits.
"The microglia are supposed to be, from the get-go, constantly clearing amyloid-beta, as well as keeping a lid on inflammation," Dr. Katrin Andreasson, professor of neurology and neurological sciences at Stanford, said.
Microglia cells are your own personal defense system.
Their function is to search and destroy dead cells and other debris in the brain such as the gummy deposits Alzheimer's disease leaves in the wake of its destructive path.
Experiments on mice have been encouraging.
Microglia goes about its business of protecting the brains of young mice.
In older mice, the presence of EP2 proteins stopped the microglia cells from doing their job of destroying the dead cells.
Another group of mice were genetically engineered to never develop EP2, and even when injected with beta-amyloid did not develop Alzheimer's.
Even more exciting news for people with Alzheimer's--blocking EP2 in older mice reversed the memory loss!
Of course, a great distance separates animal testing and drug development.
Stanford has hopes of developing a drug to block EP2.
They believe a compound that only blocks EP2 would not have unnecessary side effects.
Have researchers finally found the key to unlock the mystery of Alzheimer's disease?
Time will tell if the Stanford study is the long-awaited breakthrough and the end of Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) January 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 7, 2015>
According to my phone this morning the temperature was hovering at a balmy nine degrees and a cyclonic wind pushed the "real feel" way below zero.
My last therapy appointment was today at 11:00 a.m.
I dreaded going outside and would have loved to burrow under the covers and drink coffee.
But, dang, I couldn't miss my last appointment.
At least I was geared up for it to be my last one.
I was a little concerned since Monday as I entered the school to watch my granddaughter play basketball, I tripped on the threshold.
My right shoe came off and I landed splat on the floor a short nanosecond later.
Holy cow, to add insult to injury, I landed on the very arm I had been working on in therapy.
After the initial pain and agony, I spent some quality hours on a heat pad.
I downed some ibuprofen and didn't feel too bad on Tuesday, my day off from therapy.
By this morning, I was ready to give it a whirl.
Which brings me back to the weather.
I layered my clothing and put on my heaviest coat before I headed out the door.
When I got to Peak Performance the parking lot was much emptier than I'd ever seen it.
Sure enough, they had a lot of cancellations.
After my therapy, I headed for home.
It was too darned cold to do anything else.
Cold weathers seems to breed misery.
There's nothing that says "Big Chill" like frozen water pipes or a car that won't start.
I remember the days when we drove an old vehicle, and Jim would get up every few hours to start it up so that we would be able to go to work.
Every summer we complain about how hot it is outside, but when winter hits, we decide that the heat of summer wasn't so bad after all.
There's nothing like getting hit with an icy north wind to make you long for the dog days of summer.
This frigid winter weather can be hazardous to life and limb.
The weather advisory on my phone warned of frostbite and hypothermia.
During a cold snap in November, two homeless men died in our town.
I can't even imagine how frightening it would be to be homeless when wind chills are expected to be twenty below zero.
This type of temperatures are also dangerous for people with dementia.
Seventy percent of people with dementia wander.
While this is a concern in decent weather, severely cold weather presents a real and imminent danger.
Even dressed for the weather, time outside must be limited.
Too often people with dementia wander off without a coat, hat, and gloves.
Cold weather isn't too bad in a well insulated house.
I remember when we lived in a mobile home water froze overnight in a cup I had left in the sink.
We'd crank the heat up as high as it would go, but the furnace couldn't compete with the wind whistling around poorly installed windows and doors.
I feel for people who live in older homes that are not well insulated.
Another time we lived in an older home and the propane lines froze.
We sent the kids to their grandma and grandpa's house while we tried to get the furnace working again and keep the water from freezing.
I remember us huddling under a blanket using a hair dryer to generate heat.
If that happened now, I'd probably just check into a hotel until the spring thaw.
I shouldn't complain too much about the cold while I'm warm and cozy.
I know that not everyone can keep warm in this type of weather and that bothers me.
Yes, baby, it's cold outside, but better days are coming.
I guess the cheery thought is--spring is only seventy-one days away.
Copyright (c) January 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 3, 2015>
This is the beginning of a new year, and I think it's time that we organize a revolution against Alzheimer's disease.
The National Alzheimer's Plan is to find a prevention or effective cure for Alzheimer's by 2025.
When I woke up this morning, I realized that is exactly 10 years from now!
Ten years may seem like a long time, but it isn't.
It takes an average of 12 years for a drug to traverse the path from research lab to the patient.
Ninety percent of the drugs in preclinical testing are never tested on humans.
Of the ones that make it to human testing only one in five will ever be approved.
So what can you do to join the revolution?
Assuming you are not a researcher, your efforts can be focused in a different way.
You can join the battle to End Alzheimer's!
Contact your legislators.
Write      letters, make phone calls, send emails, or visit them in district or D.C.
The      government funnels research dollars through the National Institutes of      Health (NIH).
NIH annually submits      a budget request which after modification is submitted to Congress from      the President.
Alzheimer's research is underfunded at $480 million.
In      June, thanks to advocacy efforts, an additional $100 million was added to      the NIH budget.
To put this in perspective, NIH spends $6 billion (with a B) on cancer research, $4 billion      on heart disease, and $3 billion on HIV/AIDS research annually.
Researchers      use grants to develop treatments.
Do the math.
Participate in Walk to End Alzheimer's.
More than 450,000 participants in 600 Walks nationwide raised      awareness and funds for Alzheimer's care, support, and research.
The      Alzheimer's Association is the largest nonprofit funder of Alzheimer's      research  and the world's leading      voluntary health organization for Alzheimer's care.
Contact your local chapter.
The      Alzheimer's Association has 70 chapters that serve communities across the      United States.
Chapters are the front lines in the battle against      Alzheimer's.
They will help you find the resources you need to navigate      through the quagmire of living with Alzheimer's.
Arm yourself!
No one goes into      battle without equipment, ammunition, and a plan.
To prepare yourself, acquire      knowledge about the disease and develop a plan that will provide quality      of life for the person with the disease and the care partner.
Learn how to      communicate and alleviate the stress caused by behavior.
Build a support system.
Surround      yourself with friends, family, and loved ones who will support you.
You      need people that will be on your side even when the going gets rough.
Build a medical team for the person with dementia and the care partner--primary      physician, neurologist, and specialists in any other illnesses such as      diabetes, heart disease, cancer.
Keep a log of all medical information.
Use pen and paper, a document, spreadsheet--whatever works for you--detailing      all treatments, medications, side effects, tests.
This will help you fill      out medical forms and avoid unnecessary tests or medications that caused      side effects.
Enjoy life!
Watch for moments of      joy and don't stop living.
Don't place everything on hold.
Alzheimer's is      a disease that can last for decades.
Learn to adapt to each stage and      pursue activities that put a smile on your face.
Love and patience      overcome a lot of barriers.
More than five million people in the United States currently have Alzheimer's disease and new cases are skyrocketing.
Alzheimer's is the sixth leading cause of death and the only disease in the top ten without an effective treatment or cure.
No cure.
A hundred percent fatal.
Where is the outcry?
The outrage?
This country has never been one to sit on its hands and let a disease wipe out millions of people--but that is exactly what is happening with Alzheimer's.
That is why it's time for a revolution.
This disease and related dementias--vascular dementia, Lewy body dementia, Frontotemporal degeneration, mixed dementia, Parkinson's, Creutzfeldt-Jakob, normal pressure hydrocephalus, the rare dementias (including corticobasal degeneration)--has to stop.
NOW.
It is time to arm ourselves with passion and knowledge to  eradicate Alzheimer's disease once and for all.
Won't you become an advocate and join the fight to End Alzheimer's?
Copyright (c) January 2015 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 29, 2014>
Broken Road - Photo by Jimmy Capps As another year winds down, I find myself reflecting on the past year, and the years before that, and how I've arrived at this time and place.
Have you ever stopped to ponder the small events  that shape our entire lives?
The positive influences: a chance meeting, an unusual connection, making the right choice, joy, success, birth, and random acts of kindness.
Life isn't all smooth traveling.
We have negative forces at work: accidents, disease, heartbreak, betrayal, deceit, failure, and death.
Everything that happens in life shapes who we are.
The choices we make determine the quality of our very existence.
This year the broken road has climbed some high peaks and traversed through some deep valleys.
I've lost loved ones this year.
Most recently a cousin to a lingering illness, a niece to an unexpected death, and today my sister-in-law's mother died from Alzheimer's disease.
Life is tainted with a special type of sadness when a loved one is afflicted with dementia.
Even with our small successes in Alzheimer's legislation, this awful disease is still without a cure or effective treatment.
Alzheimer's changed the course of my life.
It took away the man I'd shared my life with, changed the color of the sky, and the taste of the air.
It left a hole in my universe.
Snapped away all my plans and dreams and left me with a different destiny.
It's hard to believe that Jim died nearly ten years ago.
I'm still sorting through a lifetime of mementos, and my heart breaks when I find one of Jim's favorite shirts, a guitar pick, an old pair of glasses, an outdated drivers license--things that he once touched, used, or cherished.
Old pictures memorialize slices of our lives, and stacks of videotapes provide a record of vacations, jam sessions, or a mundane day with a conversation long forgotten.
The loss ambushes me from time to time.
But just like others who lost loved ones, I found more strength than I ever suspected lurked within me.
Basically, when life crumbles, you have two choices: quit or move on.
I like to say that I'm not a quitter so the second choice was a natural one for me.
I conquer another piece of the broken road.
Life goes on and life can be so good, sweet with many more smiles than tears.
I had some major life changes this year--retirement, marriage, living in a different home, publishing two books, and watching time blur by and recede into the past.
I have much to be thankful for as most of my family keeps on keeping on without missing too many beats.
When I think about life and all the "stuff" I've accumulated--toys, possessions, collections--it becomes clear that the important things in life can't be bought.
It is the intangibles that make life worth living: attitude, love, happiness, faith, hope, family, health...  To move forward in life, I can't keep looking back at what once was, but must anticipate what is yet to be.
After all, everything that happened along the broken road is imbedded in my memories, and seeped into my DNA.
I'm comfortable with who I am and where I am at this stage of my life.
Today at the post office I saw a former co-worker.
In fact, he was picking up the company mail.
"Looks like retirement suits you," he said.
"I love it!" I agreed.
There's something totally liberating about choosing what to do and when to do it.
Oh, sure, I still have commitments and appointments that I keep, but most of my day is what I choose it to be.
"What are your plans for today," Harold often asks me when we first wake up.
He is a planner, I'm a seat of the pants type of person.
"I plan to drink this cup of coffee," I say.
"Then what?" "Drink another cup." One thing I know--until I've had my coffee, I don't want to think about the day beyond this moment, much less plan it.
Besides, instead of spending time and energy to make plans, I'd rather be moving on down the road toward my destiny.
copyright (c) Dec 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 22, 2014>
I'm an optimistic person and would classify myself as happy--at least most of the time.
Yet some days you get an early morning phone call that seems to just make the earth tilt a little different.
I got one of those phone calls Friday morning.
I turn my phone's sound off at night because the whistling, dinging, and notifications interfere with my sleep.
Once I discovered the alarm still rang with the sound off, I just automatically turn it off at night.
So when I heard the phone buzz, I picked it up trying to figure out why my alarm was silent.
It wasn't the alarm malfunctioning, it was a phone call from my son with bad news.
My forty-seven year old niece Krystal had passed away in the early morning hours.
Shocking, unexpected news.
Devastating news.
The kind of news that can suck the air from your lungs.
A cherished family member gone.
Just gone.
Forever from Earth.
My sorrow at losing a beloved niece cannot even compare to the crushing blow this was for her parents, husband, children, siblings, grandchildren, and those privileged to be in her inner circle.
It was a big circle because Krystal had a loving heart and a gentle nature.
Today was her funeral.
Three days before Christmas, and what?
The hap- happiest time of the year?
No.
Hundreds of people gathered together to remember Krystal, honor Krystal, and to lay her to rest.
As the photos on the PowerPoint transitioned, we saw Krystal as a little girl, a teen-ager with big hair, in a beautiful white dress on her wedding day, cuddling her baby, with her family, turn around, turn around.
Krystal with her little smile, sparkling eyes, and quiet sense of humor.
I had watched her grow up in real time and the photos were fast-forwarding through the years.
When most people can't find time to join one church, Krystal belonged to two.
One a traditional Lutheran Church and the other a more modern non-denominational church.
Both pastors, one traditional, and the other quite unconventional both spoke of the woman they had grown to depend on and cherish.
After words of comfort and prayers, we queued up with a long line of cars to go to the cemetery for the interment.
After the long drive, we huddled beneath umbrellas as the rain began in earnest, shoes sinking into the soft earth.
We shared umbrellas, coats, hugs, and sorrow as the rain beat down and we prayed the Lord's Prayer.
We went inside the church to share a meal and comfort each other.
To share the sorrow.
As I talked to Mike, he said, "You know what it's like, Aunt Linda." I do know what it's like to lose a beloved spouse.
It's like losing part of yourself.
An unfillable void.
"There are no words," he said.
I couldn't agree more.
I know the pain of losing a parent, and the crushing blow of losing a brother.
I do not, thank God, know what it is like to lose a child.
We all want our children to outlive us.
I can't even imagine the heartache a parent feels at a time like this.
There's no amount of optimism that can take away the sadness.
Even a belief that those who have gone before us are rejoicing in Krystal's rebirth, she's not here with us.
We sure would have liked to have kept her a whole lot longer.
Some days are just sad, and the rain keeps falling.
There are no words.
copyright (c) 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com         
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 16, 2014>
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI, to most of us) is a way to use your own body composition to analyze what's going on inside you.
A strong magnetic field aligns the hydrogen protons in your body and then radio waves knock them out of their aligned position.
I'm not ashamed to admit that knowing my molecules are being messed with kind of gives me the heebie-jeebies.
MRIs are a great diagnostic tool and a way to detect cancer or the brain damage from dementia.
When Jim had an MRI, they had to sedate him because of his claustrophobia.
In fact, during one test, he pushed the panic button, and they took him out of the machine.
It was the results of an MRI that let us know that Jim had brain atrophy.
I recently had an MRI to determine the cause of numbness in my fingers and pain in my arm.
Based on the data gained from the tests the neurologist ran, the culprit seemed to be in my spine.
The best way to look at it--an MRI.
Surely, that couldn't be as bad as needles poked into me at random places.
This was my second MRI.
The first was about two years ago.
I suffer from occasional bouts of vertigo that causes severe vomiting for the first day or two.
I can't walk without help because I feel like I'm on a ship caught in the middle of a hurricane.
I went to the emergency room, where they performed an MRI to rule out a brain tumor.
Thankfully, the MRI was negative--or as I described it to my family, "negatory" on the brain.
I don't remember much about that MRI since I was a little out of it.
It was a blur.
I did remember the part about not having any metal, so in preparation for the latest MRI, I carefully removed my earrings and my rings before I left home.
When I looked at my hands, I noticed my glittery metallic nail polish.
Could the polish have enough metal in it to make a difference?
I was unsure, so to be on the safe side, I removed it.
The bad thing was the ruby color came off, but I could still see metallic sparkles on my nails.
Suddenly, I became obsessed with removing it.
I did another round of polish remover, but the sparkles just seemed to shine brighter.
Okay, now what?
I have a super-duper nail buffer that will remove anything.
The trouble was, I wasn't sure where to find it.
It wasn't in the tray where I keep my polish and other nail paraphernalia.
So the hunt was on.
Harold suggested it might be in my travel bag.
Sure enough there it was!
With a good buffing, all the metallic glitter was gone.
At the hospital I changed into a gown and they got me as comfy as possible on the narrow hard bed as they readied me to slide me in the tube.
"What kind of music do you like?" the tech asked me.
"Soft rock," I replied.
They plugged my ears, put a thick cloth over my eyes, and placed the headphones on.
They placed a "panic button" in my hand in case I needed to get someone's attention.
"Would you like a warm blanket?" she asked.
"Sure," I replied.
After I was all situated, they slid me into the machine and the clanking began.
I knew to hold perfectly still because that was important.
I forgot to ask how long it was going to take.
I thought maybe ten or fifteen minutes.
I listened to song after song as the machine clanked and hissed.
Suddenly, I noticed the hair on my head seemed to be moving.
Even my eyelashes were being pulled.
I thought about freaking out when my cheeks felt like they were being lifted, but I held out pretty well until my nose started itching.
It can't be much longer, I thought, as another song began.
Just then, the machine sounded different.
Whew, must be winding down.
But no, it just seemed to start all over again.
Finally, by the time they pulled me out, I had stopped being hopeful when the machine quieted down.
I didn't realize I was out of the machine until they removed the headphones and took the cloth off my eyes.
"How long did that take?" I asked.
"Oh, about twenty-five or thirty minutes." Sometimes it's better if you don't know how long something is going to last.
And to make matters even better for me, I never read about how my water molecules would be used to create a signal that would be processed to form an image of my innards.
The magnetic coils are turned on and off which creates the noise of an MRI.
The sound of the machine can be equivalent to a jet engine at take-off, hence the ear protection.
I guess MRI's are pretty miraculous and it's a whole lot better than the exploratory surgery they used to do to find out what was going on inside.
But still, it's a pretty weird experience and not one I'd want to do again soon.
Copyright (c) by L.S.
Fisher Dec 2014 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 10, 2014>
For many years, I've been an Alzheimer's volunteer and advocate and have attended the annual Advocacy Forum in Washington, D.C. for fourteen consecutive years.
Because of my advocacy on the national level, the Greater Missouri Chapter asked me to be an Alzheimer's Ambassador, to Congresswoman Vicky Hartzler and I gladly accepted.
Yesterday, I received an email from Harry Johns, Alzheimer's Association CEO, sharing good news about Alzheimer's legislation.
Congress has incorporated the Alzheimer's Accountability Act into the Fiscal Year 2015 Omnibus Appropriations Bill.
The proposed $25 million increase in Alzheimer's research demonstrates our legislators' focus on finding a cure for Alzheimer's disease.
Why is the Accountability Act so important?
It will require the NIH to submit an annual budget to Congress and the President.
This budget will specify the necessary funding to reach our goal of finding effective treatment or a cure by 2025.
The Accountability Act has been a top priority for the Alzheimer's Association and its sister organization, Alzheimer's Impact Movement (AIM).
My sister, Roberta, and I joined 900 other advocates to carry the message to Congress last spring during the Advocacy Forum.
Harry Johns says the bipartisan effort is a significant step toward winning the fight against Alzheimer's.
He said, "It demonstrates that our relentless efforts working together across our nationwide organization--including our dedicated Ambassadors and our hundreds of thousands of advocates--to make ending Alzheimer's a national priority are making a real difference." Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease in America and the cost will skyrocket as the baby boomers age.
In 2014, the cost of Alzheimer's will reach $214 billion, including $150 billion to Medicare and Medicaid.
In contrast to the cost of the disease, only 0.25% of this total is committed to research--our only hope to end this human and financial crisis.
I have been fortunate to help in the effort to increase research funding for a disease that affects more than five million Americans and their families.
We are gaining momentum and it is imperative that we relentlessly advocate until this devastating disease is eradicated.
Copyright (c) December 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com    
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 5, 2014>
Taylor Osman, author of "Where's My Memory" The far-reaching scope of Alzheimer's disease is almost impossible to comprehend unless someone close to you develops the disease.
Once you have come face to face with this merciless foe, you recognize the signs and symptoms even in complete strangers.
Several years ago I was at an enormous craft festival when I bumped into a middle-aged man who had a lost look in his eyes.
In fact, he was lost, and I instantly knew why.
Before long, his brother found him.
He saw me standing there and said, "My brother has Alzheimer's." I just nodded.
He knew that I knew.
Knowing and understanding Alzheimer's doesn't have a lot to do with age.
My grandchildren have always understood the devastation and gaping hole that dementia leaves in its wake.
Some of their memories of their Grandpa Jim are hazy.
Our youngest grandchild knows his grandpa only from stories and pictures.
When one person has dementia, it touches the entire family.
My sister, sister-in-law, nieces, and grand-nieces have been dedicated fundraisers for Alzheimer's.
We hold an annual traffic stop, and we stand in the heat, rain, or whatever Mother Nature throws at us.
We smile, wave, and thank passersby as we collect for Jim's Team.
One of the nieces that helps us fund raise each year is Taylor.
Recently, my niece Rachel shared a poem her daughter, Taylor, had written about Alzheimer's.
The poem was originally published in Accolades, the student poetry collection.
Taylor gave me permission to share this poem on my blog.
Where's My Memory?
by Taylor Osman Who are you?
I look and think.
Where's my memory?
I should know you, but I don't.
You're in my heart, but not my mind.
I see and feel your warmth.
I know you just for a split second.
Wait, the thought is gone.
Who are you?
Where's my memory?
Why is it like this?
A tear runs down my cheek.
What is this for?
I have to know, but I just don't.
Remind me again, who are you?
Where's my memory?
My memory is fading away.
I have it one minute, but then it's gone.
Where is my memory?
Dedicated to all the people battling Alzheimer's So what is it exactly that makes some people understand Alzheimer's when others never seem to get it?
Taylor gives us the key to understanding in the lines, "You're in my heart, but not my mind.
I see and feel your warmth." When you understand that the heart will remember what the mind forgets, you realize how important it is to spend quality time with your loved ones who have dementia or Alzheimer's.
Your warmth and hugs express your love even when your loved one does not remember your name, or understand your words.
Those split-second moments of clarity when you open your heart are far too precious to miss.
Copyright (c) December 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com Click on the purple badge or this link to vote for Early Onset Alzheimer's Blog http://www.healthline.com/health/best-health-blogs-contest?badge=31
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 19, 2014>
November is Caregivers Month, and I thought it was a good time to share my caregiver story.
I was eighteen years old when Jim and I were married in Honolulu, Hawaii.
He was on R&R from Vietnam, and I was on Christmas break after two semesters of college.
We struggled financially for many years.
Entertainment was hamburgers at Griffs, an occasional drive-in movie, jam sessions, fishing, camping, or traveling in one of our old vans and sleeping at rest areas.
We were short on money, but took pride in paying our bills and putting a little aside.
Jim was always there for me.
He was my strength, my companion, and my best friend.
Jim had bouts of depression, and I worried about him.
Our marriage never wavered; our love for each other was never in doubt.
We finally gained financial security and built our home.
Just as we thought life was going to be easier for us, Jim began to have cognitive glitches shortly after he turned forty-nine.
His forgetfulness didn't seem as strange as his loss of mechanical skills.
The man who once fixed our van with a piece of baling wire, couldn't change the oil.
For years, we had gone to bed an hour early and read.
It was our quiet time, our time together.
Jim lost his ability to read.
He became eccentric in the way he dressed, and compulsive about taping every program on TV.
By the time he was diagnosed, I realized the Jim I had loved for twenty-five years was turning into a different person.
The man who had always been protective of me and so aware of my needs, began to turn inward.
Surely there was a simple explanation--a stroke, a vitamin deficiency, depression.
The day the doctor told us that tests results showed Jim had dementia, I asked, "What could cause that?" The answer was shocking: dementia of the Alzheimer's type.
We knew that whatever happened, we were in this together.
We cried for hours as we faced the new reality.
We were not satisfied until tests exhausted all other plausible possibilities.
Somewhere along the line, I realized that I was going to have to get a grip on the grief and make some sense out of this tragedy.
My first step in the right direction was to learn as much as I could about Alzheimer's and caregiving.
Knowledge became power and helped bolster my confidence.
I took caregiving classes, read numerous books, watched documentaries about Alzheimer's.
I became an Alzheimer's Association volunteer and advocate--first locally and then nationally.
Most people thought I was crazy to take on volunteer work when caregiving took so much of my time.
Jim only slept about four hours a night and I spent a lot of my sleepless nights working on Memory Walk, or writing letters to my legislators or to the editor of the local paper.
Alzheimer's made me feel out of control, and being a volunteer gave me a purpose and direction at a time when I desperately needed it.
Jim wandered off constantly and to keep him safe, I put him in a long-term care facility.
My caregiving did not end when he went into the facility.
I was comfortable bathing Jim, providing his personal care, feeding him, and watching TV with him.
We would stop at Dairy Queen, go to the park or just drive around.
Aphasia made Jim silent, but that also meant he was a good listener.
Sometimes a sparkle in his eyes let me know that he understood at least part of what I told him.
Jim had more company than anyone else in the facility.
Our sons and extended family made sure he had a steady stream of loved ones to check in on him and spend time with him.
Throughout the ten years of Jim's dementia, we learned to cope and adapt to the myriad of changes Jim went through.
The one constant that never changed was our unconditional love for Jim.
I lived life in the present without looking back to what he had been because it made me sad.
I learned to not think too much about the road ahead or I would worry about what was coming.
I could hug him close and kiss him.
I could place my head on his chest and hear the irregular beat that was so distinctly Jim's heart.
Jim left this world in 2005, and I miss him still.
I miss the youthful Jim, and even more, I miss the Jim he would have been in old age.
copyright (c) November 2014 by L.S.
Fisher earlyonset.blogspot.com   
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 11, 2014>
Today is Veterans Day, formerly known as Armistice Day.
In 1919, President Wilson established November 11 as the day to remember our veterans with these words:  "To us in America, the reflections of Armistice Day will be filled with solemn pride in the heroism of those who died in the country's service and with gratitude for the victory, both because of the thing from which it has freed us and because of the opportunity it has given America to show her sympathy with peace and justice in the councils of the nations..."  In 1968, the Uniform Holiday Bill moved Veterans Day so that it became part of a three-day weekend.
But unlike other holidays, the significance of the 11th hour of the 11th month was not to be deferred to a three-day weekend.
After three years of total confusion, President Ford wisely decided that tradition of this patriotic pride should be returned to its original date.
On October 25, 1971, he returned it to November 11 regardless of the day of week.
We dedicate this one day to honor those who served our country.
We honor them for their sacrifice.
My dad fought in World War II.
He often talked about how soldiers were drafted for "the duration." What a scary thought that must have been.
They were shipped off to war with no idea of when they would come home, or if they would come home.
World War II had 297 deaths per day.
A total of 405,399 American soldiers died in this war.
This entire country was vested in that war.
Everyone sacrificed and did their part.
People were given rationing stamps for everything from tires to food.
Manufacturing of automobiles and home appliances were stopped.
And racing fans--all auto racing was banned, including the Indianapolis 500 for the duration of the war.
Jim Fisher, my brother Tommy, and nine percent of their generation served in Vietnam.
Jim served nearly a year, and my brother Tommy came home after three months when he was wounded.
Jim's wounds were harder to see.
He was wounded in spirit and had an untreated cervical spine injury.
A total of 2,709,918 were sent to Vietnam and 58,202 died.
Sixty-one percent of them  were twenty-one years old or younger.
Five of them were sixteen years old.
Unlike previous World War veterans, Vietnam veterans did not see a hero's homecoming.
They came back individually.
Some were lovingly met by family members, others came home to be spit on and called "baby killers." Jim never forgave "Hanoi Jane" and was thoroughly disgusted with Hollywood's portrayal of "crazed" Vietnam veteran killers in TV shows  and movies.
He suffered from PTSD, and I can't help but wonder what part the aftermath of Vietnam played in his early-onset dementia.
Many Americans reap the benefits of our country without personal sacrifice, and it seems that disparaging our government has become the norm.
We whine about how awful things have become and borrow trouble on a daily basis.
We have split this country along party lines rather than being united in the common good.
We're too busy placing blame for what goes wrong and taking credit for what goes right.
We salute the flag with our hands over our hearts, but too many hearts don't believe in the United States of America.
We take freedom for granted, and by doing so, we are figuratively slapping our veterans' faces.
Today, November 11, is a day to not only honor our veterans, but also to truly appreciate them.
Going to war to preserve our freedom to complain, whine, and gripe is not a small feat.
It involves sacrifice, dedication, bravery, and often leaves scars externally and/or internally.
Today would be a good time to count blessings and be thankful for the freedom we have here in the United States.
It is an opportunity to be grateful, truly grateful.
Veterans Day is one day to find every veteran you know and say, "Thank you for your service."  copyright (c) November 2014 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 26, 2014>
The ghosts and goblins of All Hallows' Eve are lurking in the dark ready to jump out from behind that old dead tree to send shivers of fright down our spines.
Since we associate Halloween with scary beings that go bump in the night, it is a good time to talk about what frightens us.
The scene is set for me to talk about the things that scare us.
As I sit in my office working on this article, the wind howls around the corner of the house and branches scrape against the window.
In fact, the unusual sounds are downright creepy.
Although some of the surveys show slightly different results, I'm going to hone in on ten common fears.
Things that go BOOM in the night.
A lot of folks are scared of storms.
Thunder and lightning can shake up the best of us.
Throw in a tornado warning complete with a heart-stopping siren, and you can create panic.
I used to be terrified of storms, but somewhere along the line, I just learned to respect them and find a safe spot if possible.
Dark and spooky nights.
No wonder the cliche for the beginning of a story is "It was a dark and stormy night." Two fears rolled into one.
The dark is the most common fear of children.
I think that's because when its dark, you can't see the monsters in the closet.
And you can't go trick or treating until after dark... Creepy Crawlers.
Let's face it.
Spiders are mean little critters that can give you the kiss of death before you can say "Granddaddy Longlegs." They all scare me...black widows, tarantulas, or brown recluse...and the only good spider is one that I see first because it will become a ghost spider.
Slithering Sneaky Snakes.
I never saw a snake that I liked.
A few weeks ago, I was at a wedding rehearsal dinner where Sedalia's own "Snake Lady" dressed up as a witch and brought one of her pet snakes in a caldron.
Fortunately, I was sitting at the back of the room.
Needless to say, I wasn't one of the people who let the snake slither around my arms.
Crash and burn.
If you are afraid of flying, you have lots of company.
As many as twenty-five million people are nervous flyers.
I don't think they are so much afraid of flying as they are crashing.
Hitchcock's Vertigo.
I have a love/hate relationship with heights.
I love looking at scenery far below, but I can freak out if I get too close to a canyon.
The spinning sensation makes me feel that I'm just going to topple over the edge, plunging to my death far below.
Hell Hounds.
I've never really been scared of dogs in general, but I've had a couple of close encounters.
One time I was handing out some literature door-to-door for a local organization.
At one house, I knocked, but no one was home.
As I started back to the car, a German shepherd wedged himself between me and the car.
I talked really nice to the dog as I slowly backed around him, never turning my back.
"Nice doggy.
Aren't you a pretty boy?
Are you having a good day, little doggie?" Coffin Claustrophobia.
Nobody likes to feel like they are in a tight spot where the air is hard to breathe.
I've known fearless men who would climb a high wire or chase storms, but put them on an elevator and their knees began to knock.
Evil Drilling Dentist.
Some people treat the dentist like he's Dr. Frankenstein and they expect him to drill right through a tooth and into the brain while laughing manically.
Mice and Rats.
Yep.
Rats are pretty scary if they wind up in bed with you.
That happened to me while staying at a very nice resort in Mexico.
Not one of my more restful nights.
But still, better a rat touching my hair than a ghost.
I don't know why, but ghosts didn't make the list.
I've had a few experiences in my life that would be classified as supernatural.
I'll save those stories for another time.
In the meantime, I'll wish you a spooky, spine-chilling Halloween.
copyright (c) by L.S.
Fisher, October 2014 https://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 17, 2014>
Often, what we get out of life depends on how we look at things.
These last few weeks of rain began to get on my nerves.
The grass is growing and the tree that came down in the storm needs to be hauled off.
Except the yard is soggy from all the rain, so it all has to wait.
This both gets on my nerves, and also is simultaneously a relief.
I can use the time to work on my projects.
While I shivered in the blustery wind and cold rain as I took the dog out for her morning constitutional, I couldn't see much good in the weather.
I turned on my computer and my brother Tommy had posted: "Been shelling chestnuts this morning, now in the lanai enjoying the cool air and a hot cup of coffee."  The accompanying photo was peaceful, beautiful, and gave me a new perspective of the incessant rain.
I drove through town yesterday and saw that gas had dropped to $2.83.
All of a sudden, I noticed my tank was half empty.
As I pumped the gas, I realized that when gas was reaching new highs, I'd have considered my tank half full and would have passed up the gas station.
It's all in how you look at things.
When I drove into Walmart's parking lot, I noticed my car thermometer showed sixty-six degrees.
The sun was shining brightly so I left my jacket in the car.
As I walked toward the door, I noticed a cold breeze and pulled my thin sweater a little closer.
I noticed that people's different perspectives of this autumn day varied from a woman wearing a winter coat to a man clad T-shirt and shorts pushing a cart.
They all seemed more comfortable than I did considering that I was dressed more appropriately for the weather than either of them.
Perspective affects our big decisions in life as well as how we react to the small moments that make up our day.
As we plug along from day to day, we can lose sight of the possibility that the rug can figuratively be pulled out from beneath our feet and we fall flat on our keister.
What happens then depends on us.
We can sit on the floor and cry from the pain, or we can stand up and keep moving forward.
We've all seen it, haven't we?
Those amazing people who choose to refuse to stay down, but instead continue to live life to the fullest.
When life looks the bleakest, they focus on the thin ray of sunshine that breaks through the gloomy haze.
As my niece, Angie, explained it: clarity.
From the moment, she found out that she had colon cancer, she knew she was terminal.
Taking what time she had left, she experienced her dream wedding and spent quality time with her family, sharing her radiant smile, love, and hugs.
She shared her thoughts, hopes, happiness, on Facebook.
On November 23, 2012, she wrote:  I think we all know what I'm thankful for.
I'm thankful I'm still alive.
Alive, to love my family.
Another day to see Reiana smile, hear Madison's laugh and see Connor's beautiful eyes.
And most of all to hear my hubby tell what "he thinks" are funny jokes.
BTW, God, thank you for bringing my brother back to me.
Occasionally, she spoke of her regrets, sorrow, and fears, but by far her words reflected her positive perspective on life.
She died on December 11, 2012 a short time after her thirty-ninth birthday.
Alzheimer's is another disease that can challenge a positive attitude.
It is a disease without a cure or effective treatment and the only prognosis is death.
Upon diagnosis, death isn't normally immanent, which makes it more difficult to see the urgency of seizing each moment of joy.
The care partner may be facing ten to twenty years of watching a disease rob a loved one of his or her memory, communication ability, skills, and talents.
Yet, if you consider the expanse of time, it would be foolish to allow this disease to steal your happiness.
When Jim was in the early stages of dementia we were able to travel, spend time with family and friends.
We shared many happy moments and good times.
It was a bleak diagnosis, but life went on for ten more years.
Even during the final stages, I loaded Jim into the van for trips to Dairy Queen or to take a walk in the park.
When he couldn't walk anymore, I wheeled him around the nursing home or parking lot.
How much you get out of life depends on how you look at it.
Most of us don't know how much time we have so we assume we have plenty.
Enough that we can spend hours, days, years, or decades without a thought as to how much time we allow ourselves to sit on our keister and cry about the unfairness of it all.
Maybe the best thing we could do for ourselves is to consider how differently we would live if we knew we only had a short time left.
Ask yourself: Who would I want to see?
What would I want to do?
How would I want to be remembered?
Would that change my perspective?
copyright (c) October 2014 by L.S.
Fisher earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 10, 2014>
Each year when I visit Washington, D.C., to advocate for Alzheimer's funding, I take my current blog book.
This year I left copies of Garden of Hope with legislators.
I leave these books with the thought that someone might read it--often a legislative aide--but seldom believe that the representative or senator will read the book.
I am an Alzheimer's Ambassador for my representative, but due to a scheduling snafu, I did not get to meet personally with Congresswoman Vicky Hartzler.
When I arrived at the scheduled time on my sheet, the Congresswoman was already gone.
Her aide assured me that Vicky had wanted to meet with me and had waited several minutes past the time on her calendar.
So I left the book and my apologies for the misunderstanding.
In early August, I was pleasantly surprised to receive a handwritten note from Congresswoman Hartzler thanking me for leaving her a copy of Garden of Hope.
She wrote, "What a wonderful collection of insights into this tragic disease plus messages of hope in our fight to eradicate this debilitating illness." She ended her note with "Thank you for leading the charge to bring awareness, spur action, and inspire hope." Okay, I'll admit this was a first!
I had never received a handwritten note from my representative.
Then, another first...A few weeks ago I received a called from a "202" area code--Washington, D.C.
When I answered the call, I was speaking to Adreine from Congresswoman Hartzler's office.
Adreine wanted to set up an appointment for the Congresswoman and me to meet for coffee on October 9.
We agreed that I would meet her in the lobby of historic Bothwell Hotel and we would have coffee in the hotel's restaurant, Ivory Grille.
On Thursday afternoon I arrived at Bothwell Hotel to find Vicky sitting in the lobby.
We shook hands and she asked if I'd like to go somewhere else since the restaurant was closed for the afternoon.
We decided to have our meeting in the lobby instead.
She talked about her morning at State Fair Community College where she spoke at a teen leadership summit.
After our visit she was going to visit the Boys and Girls Club.
For the next forty-five minutes, we talked about Alzheimer's disease and its impact on families.
I had brought fact sheets that served to remind us how many Americans know the heartbreak of Alzheimer's.
There it was in purple, black, and white: *         More than five million Americans have Alzheimer's *         Every 67 seconds someone in the U.S. develops Alzheimer's *         Alzheimer's is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States *         Fifteen million Americans provide unpaid care for a person with Alzheimer's *         In 2014 the total cost of Alzheimer's will be $214 billion--$150 billion to Medicare and Medicaid *         0.25% of the cost of Alzheimer's is being spent on research *         Approximately 500,000 people die each year because they have Alzheimer's We talked of the frustration of how a mere 1.7% of the NIH's budget goes toward Alzheimer's research.
I thanked the Congresswoman for being a co-sponsor of the Alzheimer's Accountability Act and for her unwavering support for Alzheimer's research.
We shared our personal experiences.
Talked of nursing homes, caregiving, and recognizing that a person with Alzheimer's is a person first.
Someone to love, and to find joy in his or her moments of clarity or humor.
We ended on a high note.
I gave her a handout of what we are doing in Sedalia: Photos of our successful Walk to End Alzheimer's and information about our local support group facilitated by Betty Hopkins.
Our meeting began with a handshake and ended with a hug.
The Congresswoman and I are united in this battle against Alzheimer's and for a world without it.
Copyright (c) October 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com     Watch the video of Facts and Figures: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=waeuks1-3Z4
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 1, 2014>
For the past few days, I've been immersed in reading mystery stories for an anthology.
A good mystery writer sprinkles clues throughout the entire story and then at the end it all makes sense.
Sometimes you slap your head and believe you should have figured it out, and other times, you are completely surprised.
It depends on the skill of the storyteller and how attentive you are.
I guess our greatest mystery in life is life itself.
It seems that clues pop up every day in our relationships and our health.
If we ignore those clues, or just don't "get it" life can move forward while we are oblivious to what is happening.
Most of us fear the unknown.
No matter how dire the diagnosis or prognosis, we realize that we have two choices: give up and be miserable, or live life to the fullest choosing quality over quantity if necessary.
Almost every disease has warning signs--and have you noticed that it is usually ten?
Alzheimer's is one that has narrowed the multitude of clues to a manageable ten.
I've taken a look at the ten to see what the clues have to tell me.
The number one warning sign of Alzheimer's is memory loss that disrupts daily life.
We all forget things.
Last month I showed up at the hair salon for my appointment a few minutes early so I sat down and started reading a magazine.
My hairdresser came back from lunch and began to leaf through the appointment book.
"Linda, I have your appointment down for tomorrow," she said.
Sure enough, I checked my calendar and there it was, same time, same place, wrong day.
That interrupted that day a little for her and me, but it isn't a warning sign of Alzheimer's.
Occasionally forgetting appointments is normal.
Whew!
The second warning sign is challenges in planning or solving problems.
I had a nightmare about this a few nights ago.
I dreamed I was taking a test and it used two words in questions that I didn't recognize.
How was I supposed to answer a question if I didn't understand the words?
Well, when I awoke in the middle of the night, I Googled paradigm (pattern) and esoteric (cryptic).
The strange thing is that although I couldn't place the meaning immediately, they made sense when I inserted them into the problems.
With Alzheimer's words and numbers may not make sense which can make solving a problem impossible.
Sign three is difficulty completing familiar tasks.
I run into this often when I need a password or user name to pay a bill online.
Part of the reason is that to get to the familiar task, I am using a new method.
This is normal unless I forget that I need to pay bills.
The fourth sign is confusion with time or place.
Since I'm retired, the days and months seem to swirl together.
So sometimes I admit to being a little vague about the day of the week.
Thank goodness, my granddaughter plays volleyball so monitoring her schedule helps me keep track of the days and the date.
Oh, and the place.
It really helps to show up at the correct gym.
The fifth sign is understanding visual images and spatial relationships.
This includes reading and judging distance, both of which can affect driving.
We won't talk about me getting too close to the curb and scratching my fancy wheels--twice.
Number six: problems with words in speaking or writing.
A person with Alzheimer's might have trouble finding the right word...okay, so we all have that trouble from time to time.
Sometimes, I'll be leafing through my mental dictionary and can't seem to come up with the correct word to express an idea.
My mental Google is offline, the "page cannot be found" or is "not available at this time." Sometimes it comes to me.
Sometimes not.
Still, considered to be normal.
The seventh sign is misplacing things and not being able to retrace steps.
Let's just say that I've had to call my cell phone everyday this week to locate the darn thing.
I can't remember where I left it.
As long as I can remember the number, I'm considering that a normal sign of aging.
Number eight is poor judgment.
My judgment is normally pretty good, but sometimes I'll buy both pair of shoes rather than having to choose.
Just saying!
The ninth sign is withdrawal from work or social activities.
I withdrew from work permanently when I retired at the beginning of the year.
I need to withdraw from a few social activities just because I like to stay at home once in a while.
After all, there's a new season of The Voice to watch.
The tenth sign is changes in mood and personality--becoming fearful, depressed, confused, etc.
Okay, I take ownership of being irritable from time to time, but, hey, that falls within normal range.
After reviewing the ten clues, I consider myself to be as normal as I've ever been.
Life is a challenge for each of us, but as long as we use our strengths to compensate for our weaknesses, we'll get by.
Whatever the clues say is wrong with us, we always have the ability to opt for quality over quantity.
copyright (c) October 2014 by L.S.
Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com    
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 21, 2014>
My mind is gravitating from Summer to Autumn.
There are few signs of autumn here in Missouri unless you count Halloween decorations, corn fields, and maple trees.
Grass and most trees are hanging on tightly to their summery green hues.
Temperatures are still hovering around the 70s and 80s--more indicative of summer than fall.
Heck, I even managed to get my worst sunburn of the year yesterday while working in the yard.
I wore a swimsuit top (hate the look of an entire suit!)
and a pair of shorts.
My formerly pale back is now fiery red and hot, hot, hot.
Apparently the autumn equinox in the northern hemisphere, according to Google is either  September 21st, 22nd, or 23rd depending on the source.
So, I went with my best source--the Old Farmer's Almanac, which gives the date and time as September 22 at 10:29 p.m. Eastern Daylight Savings time.
That makes me understand the discrepancy between the 22nd and 23rd, but not sure how the 21st fits in.
When autumn is in its full glory, it is a season hard to beat.
Often the retirement years are considered to be the autumn of life.
After working at a day job for years, I'm looking forward to coming into full and colorful splendor and living a full, and still, productive life.
Most healthy retirees have this same ambition.
Unfortunately, just when we are hitting our stride all those darn pesky diseases try to interfere.
I could easily break my biggest concerns down to a few major illnesses that I wouldn't want to develop--the Big "C", heart disease of any kind, or dementia.
Our risk of developing any of these diseases increases with age.
Sometimes, it's just the luck of the draw that determines what our future holds in store.
Other times, we are our own worst enemies when it comes to maintaining good health.
Most of us fall somewhere in the middle--luck of genotype and health habits.
We all know people who smoke their entire lives and never develop lung cancer.
Yet, smoking is clearly a risk factor for lung cancer since 80-90 percent of lung cancer is attributed to smoking.
Although we don't have such numbers to indicate this strong connection between smoking and Alzheimer's, smoking is considered a "significant" risk for vascular dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
Those especially at risk are people who smoke heavily between the ages of fifty to sixty.
Smoking is by no means the only culprit to increase our risk of developing Alzheimer's--at the top of the list is my personal nemesis--obesity and sedentary lifestyle.
I continue to battle with weight issues and make an effort to make healthy food choices.
And after the past three days, I'm feeling downright cocky about conquering the sedentary lifestyle.
I've been doing yardwork, mowing, lifting and loading brush, bending, stooping, walking, and more aerobic/weight lifting than I ever accomplished when I had my gym membership.
I don't see any short-term end to the physical workout either with all that remains to be done.
To further complicate matters, obesity and sedentary lifestyles contribute to two other risk factors of Alzheimer's--hypertension and diabetes.
It's a catch-22 situation.
In addition to controlling these risk factors, Maria Carrillo, Alzheimer's Association vice-president of medical and scientific relations, adds other helpful ideas to cut the risk of Alzheimer's.
She said, "Other lifestyle aspects that may contribute to healthy brain aging are eating a brain-healthy diet, being mentally active, and being socially engaged." The best and safest way to modify Alzheimer's risk is to make healthy lifestyle changes: don't smoke, exercise your brain and body, control your weight, and become a social butterfly.
Is it easy?
Not a chance!
Remember the three dreaded diseases that cut short the autumn of many, many lives?
Well, guess what?
Reducing the risk for cancer, heart disease, or Alzheimer's slashes the chances of developing any of them.
Sometimes good health can be attributed to genetics, but more often it requires a personal commitment,  determination, and perseverance.
copyright (c) September 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 11, 2014>
Our Walk to End Alzheimer's was Saturday and, as usual, I couldn't help but be a little nervous about the weather.
We were at the fairgrounds at 6:30 a.m. unloading vehicles, setting up tables, and trying to figure out the best places to put everything.
Before the 8:30 a.m. registration time, we were set up and ready to go.
By walk time, we heard good news from the registration table--we were very close to our $34,000 goal, and with the pledges to come in after the walk--we would easily reach that amount.
We handed out trophies to the largest team and the best-fundraising team which turned out to be the same team--Sylvia G. Thompson Residence Center.
Fairview Nursing Home came in second in fundraising, and Jim's Team came in third.
I think that as a family team, coming in third is quite an honor.
In addition to the trophies, we recognized the youngest walker and the one with the most birthdays.
This year it turned out that I was well acquainted with one of them and knew the proud mama of the other.
The youngest "walker" was Catherine, daughter of Jessica and Brandon Snell.
Jessica is a co-chair of the Sedalia Walk.
And the guy with the most birthdays was ninety-year-old John Chambers, better known to be as Uncle Johnny.
As soon as I came home from the walk, I faced the reality of having to find a new place to put everything in the home that I share with my new husband.
I knew that the fundraiser and walk materials that I keep from year to year couldn't stay in the back of Harold's Tahoe forever.
So, I went through the supplies and organized them to store on a shelf in the garage.
Easy peasy, you say?
Not quite.
We had to reorganize the shelves in order to find a place for my three totes.
We wound up with several trash bags, totes full of recyclable items, bags and boxes for Open Door, and, of course, there were the things to keep.
Wednesday, we made another trip to my house to start the monumental task of sorting through forty-five years of accumulation.
The problem for me is that digging through drawers, boxes, papers, and miscellaneous cubbyholes, storage boxes, and stacks of stacks amounts to tearing at the heart of memories.
It's easy for me to decide what to give to charity.
Some items were easy to toss, especially those things I should never have kept in the first place, or those I'd just never gotten around to throwing away.
But other things--Jim's belt buckles, his knife, one of his many pocket watches--okay, those I had to keep.
Harold kept pulling things out of drawers.
A phone call to the optometrist settled the issue of Jim's and my old eye glasses.
Recycle.
Am I the only person that hides a few secret things in an underwear drawer?
Harold tossed an old diary and a few of Jim's letters from Vietnam that I managed to keep since 1969.
I tossed them in the "keep" tote.
"What's this," he asked.
I looked up to see the yellow nightie I had taken to Hawaii when Jim and I married.
Moment of truth.
I couldn't wear it anymore.
It was old.
I certainly wasn't going to give it to Open Door for someone else to wear.
"Hand it here," I said.
I threw it in the trash.
And started crying.
So, in a few hours we cleaned out the dresser and chest of drawers.
We hauled out several sacks of trash, but I still have to go through the bags of socks, underwear, pajamas, shirts, shorts, and odds and ends that would clothe a small nation.
It had been raining most of the day and as soon as the rain let up we loaded the Tahoe and started down the drive.
I told Harold that I felt like I was throwing away part of my life.
"You don't have to throw away anything," he said.
"Yes, I do." I turned my head and looked out the window as we drove away.
The tears came again.
It's just too easy to accumulate and so hard to pare it down.
I never wanted my kids to have to go through all my stuff when I'm gone.
Yet, in reality, it would be much easier for them to decide what to throw away and what to keep.
They wouldn't have the emotional ties that I do and wouldn't feel so much like they were throwing away a lifetime of memories.
copyright (c) August 2014 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 30, 2014>
Sedalia Memory Walk 1998 We are entering Walk to End Alzheimer's season, and I challenge you to join the fight against Alzheimer's by participating in the Walk to End Alzheimer's or donating $100 to support someone who is walking.
I first walked in 1998 with a small group--a couple from Slater, two people from the Alzheimer's Association, and from Sedalia--Jim and me.
Oh, let's not forget the dog, Victoria.
That was it, the Sedalia Memory Walk, 1998.
We are gearing up for Walk season and chipping away at our Sedalia Walk goal of $34,000.
Our walk is one week from today--September 6.
This morning, I went online and donated $100 in honor of Jim's birthday.
He would have been sixty-nine Wednesday.
Fundraising for a disease is hard work, and it seems that without a "fun challenge" it's hard to compete for charity dollars.
Social media has been abuzz about the ice bucket challenge for ALS (Lou Gehrig's disease).
The ice water videos have gone viral, netting $100 million in August for ALS.
The movement is still going strong, and is in fact accelerating and gained over $65 million in one week.
I've seen videos ranging from my grandchildren to mega-star celebrities like Dolly Parton.
I have to say that the ALS Association has been brilliant to latch onto the idea which they credit to Pete Frates, a 29-year-old former Boston College baseball player who was diagnosed with ALS in 2012.
The ALS Association sought to trademark the "Ice bucket challenge" but withdrew the applications after public concern.
Why the heck would the public be concerned?
Well, for one thing, the ice bucket challenge began as a pro athlete's stunt giving $100 to a charity of choice.
The dousing began with golfer Greg Norman and motorcycle racer Jeremy McGrath.
If you declined the challenge, you were supposed to give $100 to a charity of your choice.
ALS is a horrible disease and when the ice bucket challenge turned exclusively to ALS it gained attention and a huge amount of funding.
According to ALS's fact sheet 12,000 people in the U.S. have the disease, and my heart goes out to those who suffer from this debilitating motor neuron disease.
Let's shift to ALZ (Alzheimer's).
We weren't clever enough to latch onto the ice bucket challenge.
Our premier fundraiser is the Walk to End Alzheimer's.
Our 600 Walks nationwide support more than five million Americans with Alzheimer's.
Nearly everyone you meet has lost a beloved relative or friend to this fatal disease.
As we age, our chances of developing the disease increases to nearly fifty-percent.
Every single one of us has a stake in finding a cure for Alzheimer's and related dementias.
So my challenge to all my family and friends is not to douse yourself with ice water, but to put on walking shoes and head to the nearest Walk to End Alzheimer's.
If you can't participate in a walk, donate $100 to your local Walk, and then challenge five friends to Walk or donate $100.
It is easy to donate online at www.alz.org/walk!
Okay, so I realize that isn't nearly as much fun as watching someone get drenched with a bucket of ice water, but Alzheimer's is a scary disease and without a cure, it will become even scarier in the next twenty years as we baby boomers age.
So consider yourself challenged, and share the opportunity to End Alzheimer's Now!
You can donate to Jim's Team at act.alz.org/WalkSedalia.
copyright (c) August 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 24, 2014>
Love is rare, grab it.
A few days ago, I came across a saying that really struck home with me: "Life is short, live it.
Love is rare, grab it.
Anger is bad, dump it.
Fear is awful, face it.
Memories are sweet, cherish it." The person who came up with these words of wisdom is unknown, but it could be the story of my life, and perhaps yours.
When I was young, I thought life flowed forward with countless days of sunshine.
I had that invincible conviction so common to the young.
Eventually, I found out how short life was as the hard hand of death entered my life.
Schoolmates died from terminal diseases when I was young.
In early adulthood, the terminators included drug overdoses and car wrecks.
I also learned at an early age how rare true love is.
Of course, I had my heart broken a few times, but when Jim entered my life, it was an entirely different experience.
I found out what it meant to love and be loved without reservation, fearlessly, and with all my heart.
Then, love blossomed with the birth of our sons, and later when our grandchildren were born.
Jim and I faced the world together, united.
I had his back, and he always had mine.
He was my protector, my best friend, and my love.
When dementia struck, we faced the awful fear of the unknown along with the predictable outcome of the known.
When Jim died, I was reminded of the shortness of life, the heartbreak of love lost, and the empty spot that replaced the part of myself that died.
I've never been a person to wallow in self-pity so I dumped the anger and began to pick up the pieces.
I found happiness with my family and friends.
I kept busy--oh, my, have I ever kept busy.
My life became full and rich again.
That rare emotion, love, entered my life again, and I said "yes" to grabbing it.
On Saturday, August 16, I took the final step to make my life complete when I married my longtime best friend, Harold.
My sons walking me down the aisle We started our married life with a lovely ceremony surrounded by family.
While honeymooning in Branson, we stopped at a scenic overlook.
I offered to take a photo of two couples, older and younger.
They offered to take a picture of us.
When Harold retrieved our camera, he told them we had just married the day before.
"Oh, are you going to start a family?" he asked Harold.
"We already have grandchildren," Harold replied.
An only child, never married, Harold has inherited an instant, large family.
My mom and I were talking about the change in his status recently.
"I hope the shock doesn't kill him," she joked.
Sure, being married again is going to require adjustments for me.
I still find it hard to think of Jim as "my first husband." I'll no longer have all the personal time that I've had in the past.
And I'll no longer have sole possession of the TV remote control.
We have a few conflicts with what we record on our DVR's--after all I don't want to give up American Idol or The Voice.
In the big scheme of things, those are just minor adjustments.
The major benefits of our marriage far outweigh the drawbacks.
I now have someone to love--and he'll always have my back, and I'll have his.
We have good times together, whether it's working on a project, traveling, visiting family, watching TV, or sitting on the deck, drinking coffee, and playing with our dog Lucy.
Unity Sand Ceremony Harold and I have joined hands to make one heart.
During the unity sand ceremony on our wedding day, Pastor Burton said, "As these containers of sand are poured together, the individual containers will no longer exist, but will be joined as one.
Just as these sands can never be separated and poured again into the individual containers, so will your marriage be a molding of two individual personalities, bonded together forming one heart, one love." What can I say?
Life is good.
I've been lucky in love, twice.
When I look back on my life thus far, I have a treasure chest of sweet memories stored in my brain.
I appreciate the value of life, and love, and look forward to creating many more special moments.
copyright (c) August 2014 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 10, 2014>
What's not to love about bright sunshiny summer days?
Here it is summer and some of us have been soaking up the rays whether at the beach, the backyard, or while gardening.
When ultraviolet rays shine on our skin, it triggers a vitamin D synthesis.
When I was growing up, we did not have an air conditioner at home, so naturally we spent a lot of time outdoors.
Times have changed, and air-conditioning is the norm.
Now, we spend much more time indoors under the comfort of air-conditioning during sunshiny summer days.
This lifestyle change has brought about common deficiency of vitamin D in a huge portion of the population.
Most of us know that vitamin D deficiency has consequences.
Without an adequate level of it, we cannot absorb calcium which causes inadequate bone development in the young and bone loss as we grow older.
This is why milk is fortified with vitamin D.  In addition to fortified milk, other sources of the sunshine vitamin are oily fish (salmon, mackerel, bluefish, and canned tuna).
It is difficult to get enough vitamin D from food alone.
The natural source is sunlight, but we have become afraid of the sun.
We slather on sunscreen and avoid any exposure.
When we do this, we no longer absorb essential vitamin D. The very reason we avoid the sun is to reduce the risk of cancer, but oddly enough, low levels of vitamin D increases cancer rates.
Low levels of the sunshine vitamin are also linked to higher blood pressure, heart disease, and Type 1 diabetes in children.
In addition to previously known health issues associated with vitamin D deficiency, researchers have found a link between vitamin D and Alzheimer's risk.
People with moderate deficiencies of this essential vitamin have nearly a 70 percent higher risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
In severe deficiencies, this risk skyrockets to 122 percent.
Researchers believe that vitamin D helps rid cells of beta-amyloid plaques, one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease.
One of the leading researchers in the study, David J. Llewellyn, University of Exeter Medical School, said, "It seems to be that vitamin D was actually helping to break down and take away those protein abnormalities."  Doctor Michael Holick, Boston University, who is an expert on vitamin D recommends stocking up on vitamin D during the summer.
He suggests five to ten minutes two or three times a week outdoors between 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. wearing minimal clothing and without sunscreen except for the face.
Sun deprived people, and breast fed infants, should take a supplement.
Summer will soon be over, so now is the time to stock up on the sunshine vitamin.
Just remember, moderation, moderation, moderation!
copyright (c) August 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 27, 2014>
The Silver Tsunami moves ahead with full force, alarms blaring and warning whistles screeching.
What will be the plight of the aging Boomer generation?
Will we pound the final nail into the coffin of Medicare and Medicaid as we reach the age of vulnerability for Alzheimer's disease?
Until now, the answer to these questions has been yes--Alzheimer's will increase at an alarming rate.
What has changed?
The cure for Alzheimer's is still that elusive goal that motivates researchers and advocates to keep applying pressure.
The Silver Tsunami builds momentum at the rate of 10,000 boomers turning sixty-five each day--and will continue until 2030 when all have turned that age.
I am a boomer and quite distressed at our future as the generation whose defining disease is Alzheimer's.
Nope.
Not what I want for my future.
Then a glimmer of real hope for boomers comes from the Alzheimer's Association  International Conference in Copenhagen.
When comparing late 1970's data, the Framingham Heart study showed a forty-four percent decline in new cases of Alzheimer's, especially in people in their sixties.
Overall better cardiovascular health is contributing to this new trend.
Routine blood work gives us the options to make adjustments to our health destiny.
By treating high blood pressure, cholesterol, and diabetes, we control conditions that otherwise would rob us of good health.
Other contributing factors to the good news for boomer's health: a decline in smoking and an increase in education.
Researchers believe that education builds up a neurocognitive "reserve" that helps compensate for brain damage.
It seems that it is harder to avoid helpful information about ways to decrease Alzheimer's than it is to find it.
This morning as I was skimming through old magazines before taking them to the recycle bin, I saw an interesting article on anti-aging that focused on brainpower.
I had seen the suggestions before, but, hey, it never hurts to reinforce prior learning.
I sped-read through the benefits of omega-3 fatty acids (note to self: eat more fish!
), eat fruits and vegetables (food, yay!
), and exercise (clears throat--trying again to get back on track).
Then, in place of the normal "exercise your brain," it was worded in a new way: Find a purpose in life.
If nothing else, I have a good handle on this one!
I believe that a purpose in life is where we boomers excel.
And get this good news--having a purpose in life means you are two and a half times less likely to develop Alzheimer's as your friends, relatives, and acquaintances who just drift aimlessly through life.
Other interesting facts I gleaned from these old "worthless" magazines included a weight reduction program based on the percentage of fresh fruits and vegetables you ate each week.
According to an article in First, you could lose three pounds a week by making fifty-percent of your food raw fruits and vegetables.
The theory is that you increase fat burning enzymes.
Hmmm.
Not so sure that would agree with my digestive system.
After reading the good news about boomer's health, I was inspired to complete a thirty-minute workout based on exercises I found in an old Reader's Digest.
After I gathered up my weights, a quilt for the floor, and a kitchen chair I was ready to start.
I turned on the TV to a thirty-minute show--Joel Osteen--for a half-hour of perspiration and inspiration.
I was not disappointed!
As I lifted weights and huffed and puffed through floor exercises, I listened to Joel Osteen talk about the life-changing value of...purpose.
Joel Osteen, the workout, and good news from AAIC helped me face the day with optimism for my personal health future--and for that of other aging boomers.
copyright (c) July 2014 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com  
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 19, 2014>
When it comes to war, we often worry about our loved one's safety and pray they will come home unharmed.
It doesn't usually happen that way.
Some come home with outward injuries, but appearances can be deceptive.
Those who appear uninjured often suffer the invisible scars of PTSD (posttraumatic stress disorder) or TBI (traumatic brain injury).
I saw firsthand the effects of PTSD and how life-disrupting it can be.
Vietnam changed Jim.
I could see some of those changes immediately--sudden loud noises could send him to the ground.
While on R&R from Vietnam, the drums from a luau on the beach threw him into instant combat mode.
Later, it would be fireworks, gunshots, nightmares, flashbacks, or mental breaks that ripped the scabs off the scars.
Of course, Jim went on to develop dementia, and I couldn't help but wonder if his PTSD or exposure to Agent Orange could have been an underlying factor.
At the time, I found an article linking PTSD to shrinkage of the hippocampus, the brain's gateway for new memories.
VA doctors dismissed the possibility of PTSD playing any part in his memory loss.
Various studies have shown that PTSD is indeed a risk factor for dementia.
In addition to PTSD studies are now underway to examine the risk of combat TBI.
Brain injury isn't always caused by a blow to the head; it can also be caused by blasts.
In fact, blasts are the cause of most combat traumatic brain injuries.
The Alzheimer's Neuroimaging Initiative is being used to compare PTSD and TBI as dementia risk factors in Vietnam veterans over age 65.
They will be broken down into groups with PTSD only, TBI only, and veterans with both PTSD and TBI.
Cohorts should be fully recruited by October 2014.
This is the beginnings of a comprehensive study in dementia risk factors in veterans.
Vietnam veterans are being used because of their age because dementia development may take decades.
The wars in Iraq, Afghanistan, and acts of terrorism have contributed to more cases of TBI.
Although I've focused on TBI in veterans, some of the other causes are sports, vehicle crashes, and the number one cause of TBI: falls.
In the United States, 1.4 million suffer TBI each year.
The three classifications of TBI are (1) mild--doesn't knock you out, or less than thirty minutes; (2) moderate--unconscious for more than thirty minutes; and (3) severe--unconscious for more than twenty-four hours.
TBI increases dementia risk.
In older adults, moderate TBI more than doubles the risk of Alzheimer's and severe TBI increases the risk to 4.5 times that of a person who has not had a brain injury.
Mild TBI does not increased risk unless it is repeated, such as that caused by contact sports or being exposed to blasts over a period of time.
Adding to the risk factors of TBI is the presence of the apolipoprotein E genotype (APOE).
In a study of boxers, all of those who developed severe dementia had at least one copy of APOE-e4.
Another interesting observation with the boxers was that the greatest risk was determined by the number of rounds boxed rather than the number of times a boxer was knocked out.
This would indicate that repeated mild TBI was as much of a risk factor as a small number of severe TBIs.
Part of the link between Alzheimer's disease and TBI is the presence of the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease--the proteins beta-amyloid and tau.
After a severe brain injury, beta-amyloid will increase within hours.
Repeated mild TBI increases the protein tau and sometimes also increases beta-amyloid deposits.
As I worked my way through the statistics, I was struck by a few thoughts.
One was that genetic testing on Jim showed that he had one copy of APOE-e4.
One copy slightly increased the risk of Alzheimer's, but not nearly as much as two copies would have.
The other thing that struck me was that Jim died at fifty-nine which would have been too young for any study with the age sixty-five threshold.
Ironically, if he had not died from dementia, he would have been old enough now.
Next month, he would have celebrated his 69th birthday.
Copyright (c) July 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 9, 2014>
The puppy came to his door on a cold winter night, shivering, whimpering, and voicing a few timid barks.
She knew she needed help, but was afraid she would get a boot in the side rather than a helping hand.
He turned on the porch light and saw her sitting there, a little puff of fur, big eyes.
"I don't want a puppy," he said.
"Maybe she belongs to one of your neighbors and just got lost," I said.
He turned the light off and tried to forget the puppy, but the look in those big eyes just wouldn't go away.
Back to the porch, light on, the puppy was gone.
He breathed a sigh of relief.
Then a sound from the back deck let him know the puppy had merely moved to a different door.
"What do I do?" he asked.
"At least give her food and water," I suggested.
"She's too little to make it on her own." Once we went outside, the puppy shied away.
She hid behind the barbeque grill.
Finally, we coaxed her out, but she surprised us by ignoring the food and water we had put out for her.
She didn't seem to know how to eat or drink.
The puppy was listless, and I had doubts that she could be saved, and if she was, would she always be timid and afraid of people?
The puppy finally took a little nourishment.
He fixed a box with blankets to shelter her from the wind and weather.
The puppy settled down and went to sleep.
After calls to the neighbors, it became obvious that someone had dumped this puppy to die along the roadway.
Although she was settled temporarily with some of the basics: food, water, shelter, the puppy would need a lot of patience, medical care, and most of all, love, in order to survive.
Humans, too, need this type of emotional support.
When a family member has dementia, and you can no longer care for them at home, you may have to find another place for them to stay.
You choose a home that will take good care of your loved one and will provide the basics and medical care they need.
Placing a loved one in long-term care doesn't mean you walk away thinking now it is out of your hands.
I believe the thing that disturbed me most when Jim was in a nursing home was the lack of visitors for some of the residents.
It not only disturbed me, it disturbed the employees.
They saw the loneliness, the listlessness, as day after day passed and no family member came with smiles and hugs.
No one to say, "I love you." No one to show their love by the simple act of being there, cheerful and caring.
Jim had daily visitors and family that loved him.
Sometimes he didn't really show much of a reaction--other times, his blue eyes would light up.
Regardless, he knew someone would be there to spend time with him.
To make him feel loved.
Love makes a life-changing difference with people--and with puppies.
The puppy that had been abandoned has turned into a rambunctious, happy, healthy member of the family.
Never underestimate the power of love.
copyright (c) by L.S.
Fisher, July 2014 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 2, 2014>
I sat out on the deck last night looking at the stars and rubbing my arms because the breeze was just a wee bit chilly.
That seemed a little strange since earlier in the day, the hot, muggy air clung to my skin and made me feel like I was trying to breathe underwater.
When I was young, summer vacation always seemed to be hot, humid, and long.
We lived in the country in the middle of nowhere.
Playing outside meant dealing with the full blast of heat and sun.
Even swimming in tepid lake water only provided temporary relief.
It didn't take long to be just as hot or hotter.
There was no place to cool off except beneath a shade tree.
During the hot summer months, I read a lot of books and spent most of my time trying to stay cool.
I'd sit in front of the box fan, dressed in tank tops and shorts, reading a book.
Nighttime didn't always bring relief.
Windows were left open and a fan would blow the cooler night air in, or on some nights, it might be reversed to blow hot air out.
Yes, summer in Missouri can be a scorcher, if you're not loitering under the air conditioner.
Of course, that's the very reason that outside can seem unbearable.
It's hard to acclimate to a twenty degree change in temperature by simply stepping over the doorsill.
I find myself chilly inside and uncomfortably warm outside.
A few times, I've been caught off guard when I step outside wearing sweatpants and a flannel shirt.
The thing I thought about when I was looking at the stars last night is that now summer doesn't seem to be nearly as long as I remember it from my youth.
If I want to go somewhere, I walk out of my frigid house, jump in an air-conditioned car, drive to an air-conditioned store.
In other words, I can pretty much avoid the heat.
Not only that, but as I get older it seems that time goes by much faster.
June was here and gone before I had time to turn the pages in all my calendars at home.
It just zipped past.
With June being my birthday month, it kind of seems like maybe life is flashing before my eyes at times.
It doesn't help that two wonderful men I had the pleasure of knowing passed away during the final days of June.
One was struck down by the cruelest of diseases--Alzheimer's.
I had been in contact with family members as they went through the day-to-day stresses, quandaries, and grief that watching a loved one fade away brings with it.
Now their grief takes a new direction as they learn to live without him.
While I was still adjusting to his death, I learned of author Jory Sherman's death.
I knew Jory was not doing well and that he made the decision to go home "to die." He wanted to spend his final days in the place he loved.
Jory was an inspiration to me when I first started writing.
He critiqued my work, and I subscribed to his "story of the month." As soon as I learned of his death, I pulled out the Sadness of Autumn, Tales of the Ozark Hills.
I knew that in Jory's lyrical words, I would find some words of wisdom and comfort.
It only took about two minutes before I came upon a passage in "Summerend" a story Jory wrote about his father's death.
Jory Sherman wrote: "There was the voice of him in the stark yellow wind that blew in my face and took my voice out of my dry throat.
There was the gentle hand of him in fallow earth where he would have kneaded the soil and its seeds to a fine and green growing.
There was his spirit scattered all over acres of sky and his heart moving the blood through my own and my children's and their children's lives.
It is a sad thing when the summer begins to end." It seems to me that summer starts to end almost before it begins.
copyright (c) July 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, June 20, 2014>
On days when I wake up and feel the urge to start the day with lifted spirits, I select a Joel Osteen sermon on the DVR.
I have several to choose from and last week I watched one about negative thoughts.
Joel said that negative thoughts take up more space in our brains than positive ones.
We find ourselves dwelling on the things that hurt us.
Did you realize that every second you are alive, your brain is actively thinking?
We have between 50,000 - 70,000 thoughts each day.
With 35 to 48 thoughts bouncing around in your brain each minute, it seems that some of them would have to be negative.
Life deems that bad things are going to happen to good people.
You are going to be put down, criticized, humiliated, make stupid mistakes, have terrible thoughts, lie, cheat, hurt other people, go a little haywire from time to time...the list goes on and on.
Well, guess what?
We have this massive filing system in our brains where all those ugly moments are stored.
Entire events are stored in our brains, complete with the emotions associated with them--good or bad.
When something makes us retrieve a negative file, we open the Pandora's box inside it.
Rushing out of that file are all the emotions associated with the memory, taking us back to a place we don't want to be.
When you have a loved one with Alzheimer's you can build up a huge emotional file cabinet.
I gave a presentation on caregiver emotions last week at the Senior Center in Warsaw, Missouri.
We talked about guilt, resentment, worry, anger, loneliness, defensiveness, and grief.
These are common emotions stored in caregivers' memories.
We also talked about strategies to take control over these emotions.
Now that I'm getting older and more philosophical, I find myself wondering just exactly how those pesky negative thoughts pop into my head and how to lessen their impact on my daily life.
Joel Osteen said that when negative emotions dominate our thoughts, we need to switch the channel instead of replaying those hurts.
A similar idea surfaced in an article written by Joseph M. Carver, Ph.D, psychologist.
He points out that the brain operates automatically, pulling files randomly throughout each day depending on memory triggers.
"When the brain operates on automatic, the files it pulls are greatly influenced by our mood.
For example, if you are severely depressed, if your brain is on 'automatic,' it will pull nothing but bad, trash, and garbage files." A powerful tool at our disposal, according to Dr.
Carver, is the ability to change a depressed mood by "simply switching the brain to manual, taking more control over our thoughts." Or, as Joel Osteen put it, switch the channel.
Although I don't think I have as much negative energy bouncing around in my brain as I once had, the occasional pessimistic thought can dominate my thinking.
Fortunately, I've learned how to "switch the channel." The goal is not to bury emotions.
In fact, the opposite is often more beneficial.
If we can deal with our emotions immediately, the solutions are stored along with the traumatic experiences and help us cope with that emotion.
Yes, most of us can direct our thoughts into a positive direction.
At first, I couldn't even tell people that Jim was diagnosed with Alzheimer's without choking up and bursting out in tears.
I took control of my thoughts by turning a negative into a positive.
I started to speak about Alzheimer's, began the Early Onset Blog, and became an Alzheimer's advocate.
Chemicals in our brains determine our moods and feelings.
Sometimes traumatic events or long-term negative thoughts can throw our brain's chemical balance out of whack.
When that happens, it may be necessary to take medication to bring the chemicals back in balance.
Through positive thinking, physical activity, and mental stimulation, we can handle temporary or fleeting negative emotions.
Earlier, I compared the brain's negative emotions to opening Pandora's box, but the most important part of the legend is what she found in the bottom of what she believed to be an empty box.
When she opened it again to show it was empty,  Hope was released.
We, too, can replace negative emotions with hope by taking control and switching the channel.
copyright (c) June 2014 by L.S.
Fisher earlyonset.blogspot.com Sources: Joel Osteen, www.joelosteen.com, Joel and Victoria's Blog, February 28, 2014 "Emotional Memory Management," www.drjoecarver.com, Joseph M. Carver, Ph.
D., Psychologist  
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 9, 2014>
Jessica Snell, Alzheimer's Volunteer I'm sure you've heard that experience is the best teacher.
I've come to the conclusion that not only is it the best teacher, it can also be the cruelest teacher when it comes to an Alzheimer's caregiver.
When life delivers a knockout punch, we have two choices: Lay on the mat and writhe in pain, or push off the mat and stand up and fight back.
Experience tells us the only way to survive is to drag our butts off the ground and prepare ourselves to do battle.
You've seen it haven't you?
I'm referring to those life warriors who leave shock and awe in their wake as they fight back against all odds.
The Davids of affliction fighting the Goliaths of disease.
These warriors don't know the meaning of giving up, or quitting.
They trampoline off the mat reaching new heights, beyond anything they could have imagined.
In the past fifteen years I've met hundreds of amazing caregivers and people with dementia.
There's Tracy who has lived with dementia for more than a decade.
She worked at several different jobs, raised a child, and soldiered through marital ups and downs.
The one thing she has never done is give up.
She makes the most of each day placing her trust in God.
Another friend, Karen, showed tremendous strength by keeping her husband at home until his death from familial Alzheimer's.
I've seen courageous people step out of their comfort zone to become speakers, support group facilitators, advocates, and fundraisers.
Not everyone goes forth and becomes a public face, but that doesn't mean they have given up.
They do what they have to do, excel at it, and quietly go about their business.
Casual acquaintances never notice the soul scars left from being a caregiver to a loved one with dementia.
Last week, I spoke to a group of local business leaders about Alzheimer's, the September 6 Walk, and several upcoming team fundraising events.
When I finished, a man sitting next to me gave an impassioned testimony to the difficulty of taking care of a loved one with Alzheimer's.
"Only someone who has provided care can really know how hard it is,"  he said.
Bullseye.
Being a caregiver is the hardest job I ever tackled in my life.
The most famous Alzheimer's disease caregiver's guide  is called The 36-Hour Day for a reason.
When I first read the book, it scared me.
I thought that surely, only rare cases got that bad.
And after the initial shock, and realization that yes, it could be that bad, I panicked as I doubted my ability to do this.
Experience became my teacher.
At first, I learned from other people's experiences.
In turn, I passed on their experiences and added my own to the mix.
We Alzheimer's caregivers have to think on our feet, be creative, and not be afraid to call for help.
It is when we internalize our caregiving fears and anxieties that we set ourselves up for failure.
And, failure is not an option when someone needs our attention, devotion, and loving care.
Part of being a successful caregiver is to become part of something bigger than yourself.
That can be personal spirituality or it can be a public commitment as a volunteer.
As a volunteer, I found that I helped myself as much as I helped the Alzheimer's Association.
It also allowed me to keep company with more amazing people.
In the midst of a downpour Saturday morning, I attended a fundraiser organized by two of our walk team captains.
I was happy to see the weather hadn't deterred anyone from eating a delicious breakfast.
Jessica Snell, team captain and co-chair of our Sedalia Walk, wore an Alzheimer's awareness T-shirt that said,  "We don't know how strong we are until being strong is the only choice."  This slogan is used for many diseases because it has a universal appeal for anyone who has been surprised by his or her inner warrior.
Understanding this concept is the diploma handed out by the cruel teacher of life to those who refuse to stay on the mat.
copyright (c) June 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, June 6, 2014>
Linda Fisher, Sedalia, MO, author and speaker, will present a one-hour program on Caregiver Emotions, 10:00 a.m., June 12, at the Senior Center at Harbor Village, Warsaw.
The presentation focuses on Alzheimer's caregivers, but caregivers for other diseases are encouraged to attend.
"Being a caregiver for a loved one is on-the-job training for a job you never wanted," Fisher said.
"Caregiving is an emotional rollercoaster.
Before you tackle caregiving, it is essential to  take care of your own emotional wellbeing." Fisher became an Alzheimer's Association volunteer when her husband developed dementia at forty-nine years old.
She is an award-winning author and blogger who has published six books of essays from her early-onset Alzheimer's blog at http://earlyonset.blogspot.com.
She is an Alzheimer's advocate and serves on the Alzheimer's Association Greater Missouri Chapter Board of Directors.
The presentation is free and open to the public.
Reservations are not required, but RSVP's are appreciated.
For more information contact Charlene, Senior Center, at 660-438-3569.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 2, 2014>
Life is always moving forward, and I participated in two different types of promotions this week.
One promotion was my grandson from kindergarten to first grade complete with cap and gown.
The children performed delightful programs, but not all entertainment was during the performances.
My grandson decided his hat was more comfortable twisted sideways and that was how he wore it most of the evening.
The boy sitting next to him had his tassel swinging between his eyes.
We ended the evening with cakes, cupcakes and punch.
One cake said, "Goodbye Kindergarten" and the other, "Hello First Grade."  I'm sure time will fly by between now and the day this group of youngsters will walk the stage again to receive high school diplomas.
It might be interesting to compare their behavior at that graduation with this one.
The other "moving on" event this week involved a promotion from the world of work to retirement.
Staff, board members, and former board members surprised Linda Newkirk, executive director of the Alzheimer's Association Greater Missouri Chapter, with a retirement reception.
It was good to see some of the former board members I had lost contact with over the years.
Some of the Board members at the reception were those I had served with the first time.
After a self-introduction, each person told of his or her connection with the disease, the chapter, with Linda, and more importantly--the mission.
We were a roomful of people who understood the heartbreak and challenges of Alzheimer's.
Like many of us, Linda's first connection with the Alzheimer's Association was because of a loved one with dementia.
She found the information, support, and resources she needed.
Later, Linda was offered a job with the Chapter and eventually was promoted to executive director.
Her positive, capable leadership helped our chapter flourish.
She isn't one to seek the limelight and was a little uncomfortable with being the center of attention in a roomful of people who wanted to honor her and her accomplishments.
I served on the Chapter board for six years, was off six years, and returned in 2012.
Because of my hiatus from the board, I wasn't on the board when they hired Linda as the executive director.
I really got to know her better when I approached her with the idea of the Alzheimer's anthology.
She immediately supported the idea--which was amazing considering I had no experience in publishing a book.
I just had a big idea, and she became one of my staunch supporters.
We will miss Linda's leadership.
She guided us through the transition becoming a national chapter.
When two Missouri chapters consolidated into the Greater Missouri Chapter, Linda stepped up as the executive director for a much larger area.
Linda's main focus has been to ensure the Chapter succeeds in its mission to provide excellent service to folks coping with Alzheimer's disease.
The board members dished out a lot of good natured teasing about Linda chairing the Columbia walk.
Oddly enough, that didn't seem to be on her retirement agenda.
Linda is saying "Goodbye Work World" and "Hello Retirement." She is moving on and we just need to step out of her way.
copyright (c) June 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 26, 2014>
My earliest memory of Memorial Day was going to the cemetery to place flowers on graves.
It always made me feel just a little bit weird to realize that in the ground beneath my feet lay all that remained of a human body.
Since I didn't have x-ray vision, I imagined that mummified bodies lay in air-tight coffins.
When we visited the old cemeteries where some of the graves were sunken, I carefully avoided those areas fearful that I might fall through.
I always noticed the American flags, but most of the graves we visited were family and not necessarily military.
Sometimes we would run into other family members who were placing plastic floral arrangements on graves.
Then, it was a time to enjoy seeing the living.
It seems it was usually hot, and shade is hard to come by in most cemeteries.
Often a table is set up where you could make donations for the upkeep.
Nobody likes to see overgrown brushy cemeteries.
The old cemetery where my great-grandparents are buried is usually cleared by family members.
I saw some people on Facebook planning a time to work on it since it wasn't done this year.
Most people celebrate life on Memorial Weekend with picnics.
The red, white, and blue is the only thing that says Memorial Day more than grilled hotdogs and hamburgers.
For the last nine years I have visited the Missouri Veterans Cemetery in Higginsville for their Memorial Day Services.
Although several artificial arrangements will be placed on graves, the cemetery rules call for cut flowers.
Flowers are usually easy to find, but  it is a challenge to find a plastic (unbreakable) vase to put them in.
This year, I lucked out.
I bought a dozen roses and found a clear plastic container.
I decorated it with patriotic duck tape and with some red ribbon.
I always like to put Jim's name on the arrangement I take, but this year it suddenly occurred to me to put his picture too.
I printed out a shipping label, covered it with clear packing tape.
I was pleased with the results.
This year, my sister-in-law Ginger and my great-niece made the trip with me.
We stopped at McDonald's and arrived at the cemetery a mere twenty minutes before the scheduled start time.
We were directed to park near the new columbarium.
We followed the sidewalk, crossed the bridge, and made it to the original columbarium just in time for the services to begin.
The special guest speaker, Senator David Pearce, talked about how families had put special inscriptions on the stones.
He began to read a few of them and one was "Rest High on That Mountain"--Jim's stone.
Mayor Bill Kolas, Higginsville, spoke about how the traditions of Memorial Day has changed.
Memorial Day used to be the signal that it was okay to wear white shoes.
Of course, in today's world, we wear white shoes when we feel like it.
Instead of being "Decoration Day" to honor the fallen, for some people it's all about picnics and sports.
He talked about how school children no longer learn the history of World War I, or World War II--how they've never learned about Pearl Harbor, Normandy, Iwo Jima, Okinawa--because text book companies have left them out.
This lack of history, he said, included governments.
When President Charles DeGaulle demanded that all U.S. troops be evacuated off French soil, President Johnson directed Secretary of State Rusk to ask if that included the American soldiers buried there.
I was able to walk along the side and placed the roses in front of Jim's niche during the ceremony.
I stood beneath the shade of my umbrella for the remainder of the program.
When the speakers were finished, the rifle volley and "Taps" reminded us more than words of the veteran's sacrifices for the good of the country, for our freedom.
It was a lovely service in a beautiful cemetery that honors our Missouri Veterans.
Flags from the branches of service, the POW flag, the Missouri State Flag, and Old Glory flapped in the breeze, keeping watch over the veterans.
As the crowd began to clear, peace blanketed the cemetery.
copyright (c) by L.S.
Fisher, May 2014 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com    
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 19, 2014>
It seems that no matter what you want to do, someone will remind you, "There's an app for that," and sure enough there is.
Often it is things you don't even think about.
"How did you tie that scarf?" There's an app for that.
Apple owns the trademark for the slogan, but it now pops up in everyday language.
It has become a running joke that apps can make the difficult easy.
They provide quick, simple solutions.
We now have an "app generation" that knows they can click on an icon and have the knowhow that used to be passed from generation to generation.
They take for granted having the world at their fingertips, a world that we couldn't even imagine when we were kids.
As personal electronic devices become easier and more user friendly, we boomers have come to embrace the wonderful world of technology.
What we have learned is something that younger generations have always had.
We went through years of schooling without spell check, grammar check, the ability to just back up to erase the typed word, no Google search for research papers, rotary telephones plugged into a wall that served one purpose--conversation, and no concept of what an "app" was, or that it would ever exist.
Even those of us boomers with wild imaginations didn't foresee the day when school kids would be walking around with text books on a slim device.
And the thought of being in constant communication with our parents would have probably seemed more like a nightmare than a desired condition.
Our parents were parents--not our best friends.
Now that we boomers are reaching the age when we are most vulnerable to Alzheimer's, the brave new world has come up with a possible solution--maybe, just maybe, there is, or will be, an app for people with dementia.
I read an article this morning about Apple and Google technology helping fight Alzheimer's disease.
The article spoke of tests and treatments disguised as games.
Wrist watches and eye glasses that could be used for GPS tracking, facial recognition, and help with daily living.
Maybe more research should go into developing smart phones, or other electronic devices, specifically for people with dementia, especially those who are in early stages.
Devices would need to be easy to keep track of, super easy to use with voice activated apps, and pictures.
Think about the problems that people in the early stages of dementia have--they forget appointments, forget to take medication, get lost, have trouble communicating, and trouble problem solving.
Well, I know for a fact that I've used my smart phone to solve the first three problems on that list.
I'm not too likely to forget appointments when my smart phone reminds me.
I had trouble remembering to take my morning medication until I put a reminder on my phone.
Getting lost is not an option with GPS on my phone.
Wouldn't it be easier for the memory impaired to communicate if they could see the person they were talking to instead of just hearing them?
After all, words are only seven percent of our communication with each other.
Facial expressions are included in body language and account for 55 percent.
We've already discussed that there's an app for solving a myriad of problems.
Why not have Medicare dollars pay for technology to enhance independent ability rather than drugs that cause side effects and often diminish alertness?
Not only can technology help now, it will be even more beneficial for future generations who have technology entrenched in their long-term memories.
copyright(c) May 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com Article: Sun, Leo.
http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/05/18/how-apple-and-google-are-helping-fight-alzheimers.aspx  
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 12, 2014>
I used to think that older/retired people didn't need much sleep.
Seemed like after years of forcing themselves out of bed during their working years, they found themselves jumping out of bed at sunrise just because that's when they felt like getting up.
When you think about it, that works well for someone who goes to bed early.
If you have your eight hours of shut-eye in by daylight, you are going to want to jump up and start the day early.
Then there's those like me who stay up until midnight.
A full night's sleep will still get me out of bed by eight and that's plenty early.
What I don't like is when I wake up in the middle of the night and can't go back to sleep.
Last night, I woke up at about three thirty.
I tossed, turned, and tried to go back to sleep.
No luck.
Then, when I thought it might happen, my weather alert radio went off.
I dragged my sleepy self to the kitchen to turn it off.
I pushed the button that tells what the alert is, and it started giving a regular forecast.
I didn't hear anything resembling weather that warranted the alarm.
Back in bed, I couldn't help but think there should have been a reason for the bells and whistles disturbing my peace.
Well, with my smart phone, I normally receive weather alerts on Facebook and via email, not to mention radar, and Google news.
I debated.
Browsing the Internet tends to keep me awake, but better safe than sorry, right?
Okay, curiosity won.
First email.
No alert.
Then, Facebook.
Oh geeze, couldn't help but look at all the old photos posted for Mother's Day.
They just went on, and on.
Time passed.
It was soon four thirty, and I was wide awake.
Still, determined to sleep awhile longer, I put down the phone and resumed tossing and turning, mind churning.
In the still of the night, I started thinking about how seemingly insignificant decisions or events changed the entire course of my life.
I thought about the chain of events that led up to meeting Jim... On a summer Saturday, my mom and I were in the Dew Drop Inn eating hamburgers and fries when Kenny Fisher walked in.
My mom knew him and introduced me.
A week later, Kenny, "Uncle Orvie," introduced me to his nephew.
In many ways, it was a random meeting on an otherwise uneventful day in a series of uneventful days.
Yet, that chance meeting changed the course of my life.
Sometimes the randomness of life scares me.
The thought that if I do this, or don't do that, it can change my destiny for better or worse.
My life sometimes seems out of control, careening through time and space, heading toward that final frontier.
I've always had this insatiable curiosity as to what makes me, me.
Why are my thoughts, fears, joys and sorrows, and life's experiences inside this particular body, living this unique life, in this specific place?
In opposition to the scary thought of where the path of life is taking me is the comfort of what I consider to be my master plan.
This isn't just based on my decisions, but on my destiny.
This isn't to say that I don't think my decisions are important anymore, in fact, I think they are crucial.
But somehow, it seems that when I reach a crossroad, I choose the path that is right for me.
All my heavy thinking didn't help me go back to sleep.
So, just like other "older" people I used to shake my head at, I was up before dawn.
A few cups of coffee, and I was good to go.
I wonder if today will bring one of those life changing decisions, or will it be merely another forgettable day?
I may not know that answer for years--or I may know it by sundown.
Whatever the day brings, I'm confident it will fit into my master plan.
copyright (c) May 2014 by L. S. Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, May 7, 2014>
April was a busy month and the first week of May was more of the same.
On May Day, I went to the Lodge of the Four Seasons to spend time with some of the most inspiring women I have ever had the pleasure to add to my circle of friends.
Business Women of Missouri are focused on improving life for all women, but especially those who are struggling.
I am proud to be part of a group that focuses on legislation to help women, scholarships, collecting personal care products for women's shelters...everywhere you looked, women shared ideas, hugs, and helping hands.
My friend, Nancy, has served as the state president for the past year.
As part of Nancy's team, I learned just how complex planning a conference can be.
Fortunately, we had capable leaders who were able to crunch the numbers to find that, indeed, we could meet our obligation.
They dared to break the mold and try some new ideas.
Because of this, our Saturday morning program included two dynamic, and inspiring, speakers.
Nancy finished her term as president and turn the reins over to Sherry whose theme is "Dare to Inspire and to Be Inspired." Inspiration--the word comes from the same Latin root word as respiration, spirare, which means "to breathe."  Inspiration makes me feel alive.
Today has been both a sad day and an inspiring day.
This morning, the sun was shining and a breeze provided a perfect day for being outdoors.
The day started with setting tomato and pepper plants into the earth, with the promise of fresh produce later in the summer.
It was still early when I headed toward Versailles to a memorial for a lovely lady who left this earth too soon.
Loretta had asked two family members to speak at her services.
Both spoke of how inspiring and life-changing their relationship with Loretta had been.
There's no better legacy to leave than to be a positive influence on others.
Afterwards, my mom, sister, brother, and sister-in-law went out to lunch.
As is typical in a small town, the place was filled with people we knew.
When my aunt and uncle came in, we squeezed together to make room at the table for them.
The conversation was lively, filled with humor.
I was sitting at a table with people who inspire me.
Then, more cousins/aunts (our family is complicated because my dad's cousins married my mom's brothers).
It was heartening to spend some time with people I've known my entire life.
Inspiring.
My day ended with board members of our local Business Women's Club.
Once again, I sat at a table with caring women whom I admire and am inspired by.
These women give generously of their time and talents.
As we said our goodbyes, shared hugs and encouragement, I walked out of the restaurant thinking I would jump in my car and head home.
It had been a long day.
Instead, I decided to walk across the street and look at the veteran's bricks I had purchased in honor of Jim and my dad.
The evening breeze whipped the eternal flame.
Suddenly, I realized how beautiful the evening, and how inspiring the tributes to those who dared to lay their lives on the line for our country.
The names on memorials and the rows of bricks were evidence of sacrifice and commitment.
I wandered down the sidewalk reading the names.
I saw one inscribed with a date when a life was lost in the Philippines.
Sad, but inspiring.
I walked around snapping pictures of this familiar landmark, that had suddenly taken on a special atmosphere.
I was the only person on the courthouse lawn.
Had that ever happened before?
What a perfect evening.
What a great day to be alive, and appreciate those who died so that I could walk around the courthouse on a peaceful May evening.
The breeze, the very breath of inspiration,  ruffled my hair, caressed my skin, and filled my heart with hope and happiness, as I dared to be inspired.
copyright (c) May 2014 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 21, 2014>
This Easter seemed to be a bit of a letdown as I drove to church.
Of course, maybe that was to be expected since Good Friday marked the ninth anniversary of Jim's death.
I was bummed because I was going to Easter at the Matthewson alone.
I love the years when my kids and grandkids go with me, but this year everyone had other plans.
My sister-in-law had planned to go with me, but she called Sunday morning to let me know that she couldn't go either.
Once I realized I'd be going by myself, I thought about not going.
But since I had already taken my shower and had my clothes laid out, I decided to go solo.
Driving time is thinking time for me.
So driving to the Fairgrounds, I found my mind wandering to the ghosts of Easter's past.
I thought about Dorothy's famous Easter cake that she always sent to the employees at the Coop.
It was a fluffy white cake topped with coconut "grass" beautifully decorated.
I thought about my mother-in-law, Virginia, fixing a huge Easter feast and inviting everyone in the family.
Easter was a big deal with Easter dresses, Dinah wearing her Easter hat, laughter, music, and dozens of little ones filling baskets with eggs.
I thought about Jim and when our kids were little, ready for church in western shirts I had made for them, complete with pearl snaps.
It seems like a different world, a different me.
I can't believe I had the patience, or time, to sew those little shirts.
I thought of school plays, baskets, family, spring flowers, butterflies, the days when April was a time of rebirth and not a time of sorrow and death.
All these thoughts left me teary eyed as I suddenly found myself longing for the happy Easters of the past.
I pulled myself together, and parked my car as directed by the people assigned to the parking lot.
Our church puts a lot of effort into Easter at the Matthewson.
Normally, our church has different services at two different locations, but on Easter everyone comes together and invites the community to join us.
It is always an uplifting, spirited service.
A giant cross was rolled inside and kids with butterfly wings swirled and swooped on the stage and down the aisle.
Pastor Jim asked us to turn on our cell phones and hold them up in remembrance of loved ones.
He said to send the message that "God is alive." We sang songs, celebrated the rebirth of our Savior.
During the message, Pastor Jim said a few words that really touched me.
Not relying on my memory, I typed his thoughts on butterflies into Quick Office on my phone.
You can't put wings on your back and pretend to be a butterfly, and you can't have wings and continue to crawl.
When you think about it, butterflies begin life as a lowly caterpillar, crawling around searching for food.
Their lives are totally boring, mundane, as they eke out their very livelihood by eating the leaves beneath their feed.
They mature through stages called instars all the while filling themselves with toxic substances that stick with them and protect them from predators once they become adults.
Through metamorphosis, the homely caterpillar emerges as a stunning butterfly and begins life anew.
Butterflies don't crawl anymore, they flit around showing off their colorful regalia while they feed on sweet flower nectar.
Butterflies symbolize rebirth.
In ancient Greek, the word for "butterfly" means "soul" or "mind." In other cultures, butterflies symbolize love, long life, transformation, animal spirits, celebration, good luck, spiritual evolution, or a sign of God's favor.
To me, the butterfly symbolizes hope.
I believe that no matter how low I might be at times, or when I think about what might have been, the butterfly promises that the days ahead will unfurl moments of breathtaking beauty.
No pretending necessary--just spread those butterfly wings and fly.
copyright(c) April 2014 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com              
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 13, 2014>
I just returned from my fourteenth annual journey to Washington, D.C., for the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum.
My sister, Roberta, made the trip with me this year--for her third trip to our nation's capitol to be a voice for Alzheimer's.
We went to D.C. early in order to take a look around.
As I browse the photos I snapped along the way, images emerge showcasing a city of stunning architecture, monuments, cherry blossoms, reflecting pools, fountains, gnarled trees, gawking tourists, honking taxis, a Sponge Bob Mailbox, a street musician playing a soulful saxophone...  My camera captured images of the past and future statues in front of the National Archives, and I read the words beneath: "Study the Past," and "What Is Past Is Prologue." As I pondered those two statements, I had turned and snapped a photo of the building across the street.
Then, in the corner of the frame, I saw him.
He was sleeping on a park bench, covered with a tattered green plastic tarp.
This thin shelter was expected to ward off the chill of the night.
As we walked past him, we could hear his snores and see the blanket rise and fall.
He was one of the unsheltered homeless.
Out of D.C.'s 6800 homeless, more than 500 are unsheltered.
They sleep in parks, in doorways, cubbyholes throughout the city.
We saw a homeless man in Subway counting coins to buy a breakfast sandwich.
Others beg for coins, or wander the streets pushing a cart overflowing with their treasures, hollow-eyed and defeated.
I couldn't help but wonder how many were confused and suffering from dementia.
It bothered me to know that statistically the odds were high that at least some of the homeless must have Alzheimer's.
After all, the focus of this journey  was  Alzheimer's and a strategy to keep Alzheimer's research funding in the budget.
Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease in America and drains Medicare and Medicaid of $150 billion annually.
Yet to fight this monster disease that gulps our economy, we wield a plastic sword.
Testifying on Alzheimer's research before the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee, Francis Collins, Director of the National Institutes of Health, said, "We are not, at the moment, limited by ideas.
We are not limited by scientific opportunities.
We are not limited by talent.
We are, unfortunately, limited by resources to be able to move this enterprise forward at the pace that it could take."  Our mission, as advocates, was to storm Capitol Hill to bring attention to the serious underfunding of Alzheimer's research.
Nearly 900 of us showed up in our purple sashes to tell our stories and to ask our legislators to increase Alzheimer's research funding by $200 million.
If we receive this increase, our funding will be $766 million--the most ever invested in Alzheimer's research.
To put it in perspective--Alzheimer's is the sixth leading cause of death with one-third of seniors dying with Alzheimer's or another dementia.
Approximately a half million people die each year because they have Alzheimer's.
This deadly disease cannot be prevented, cured, or even slowed.
Yet, our nation is taking a pass on investing enough resources to take advantage of the talent, opportunities, and ideas generated by the brightest scientific minds in America.
Help us make Alzheimer's a disease of the past.
Tell your legislators that we need to invest in America's future by finding a cure for Alzheimer's.
It can be done; it will be done if we care enough.
We can't win a war with a plastic sword.
One of the health aides gave us a hint.
She said that to get funds increased, we had to be visible and audible all year.
Don't let them forget about Alzheimer's!
Nine hundred purple sashes make a statement, but if you want to end Alzheimer's and couldn't go to the forum, please make a phone call, shoot off an email, or visit a district office.
If we become a big enough pest, Congress will listen.
copyright (c) April 2014 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 3, 2014>
Maine Sunrise Sleep was elusive as a severe thunderstorm chose midnight to crash, boom, and pelt the windows with hail.
About the time exhaustion won the tug-of-war, a ka-boom rattled the windows and the sky lit with the violent flash of nearby lightning.
Not to be outdone, my new phone shrieked an alarm.
I'm still learning about the bells and whistles, but a siren in the middle of a storm didn't seem like a good thing.
It was a flash flood warning.
I think I'd just been warned by the deluge on the heels of the hail.
I finally fell into a uneasy sleep with equally disturbed dreams.
I woke up to distant rumbling thunder, gray skies, and an alarm clock flashing 5:25 a.m. My phone said it was seven o'clock, so I took a look at Google news.
National news covered the shooting at Fort Hood; state news concentrated on the weather.
Health News was the real eye-opener of the morning.
Okay, I already knew that sleep helped with weight loss.
Of course, after the night I'd just experienced, that was down the tubes for today.
This study by the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine concentrated on sunlight without regard to sleep, caloric intake, or exercise.
The sun affects our circadian rhythm and synchronizes our internal clock.
Maybe I'm a little on the ignorant side, but I had never heard of circadian rhythm.
According to the article, "Circadian rhythm is the body's physical, mental and behavioral changes that follow a roughly 24-hour cycle." How could I have not known this term when apparently circadian rhythm is what makes us tick?
The super good news brought to light by this study was that body mass index (BMI) can be greatly reduced with twenty to thirty minutes exposure to morning sunlight.
In fact, exposure to light can account for 20 percent of BMI!
Think of all the pills, strict diets, powdery drinks, nasty tasting chocolate bars, and invasive surgery that people undergo to lose weight and, more importantly, bring their BMI to a healthy level.
Think of Americans saving $60 billion spent on weight loss programs each year!
Many of us suspected that our lifestyle contributed to an alarming increase in obesity.
We spend the majority of our lives indoors, whether at home or work.
Some of us (this is where I raise my hand) are night owls.
We stay up late regardless of the time we have to get up in the mornings.
I spent most of my working years with too little sleep and almost zero exposure to sunlight.
That's a health double whammy.
And when you work, thanks partially to daylight savings time, your exposure is to afternoon light, which does not have the same benefit as morning sunlight.
Maybe I'm being a little optimistic, but since morning light affects mood and behavior, as well as BMI, couldn't morning light therapy be helpful for people with Alzheimer's?
We know sun-downing is brought on by waning light and that a well-lit room can help behavior.
Maybe an early morning walk, or even quiet time outdoors would provide an uplifting start to the day.
Without sunlight between 8:00 a.m. and noon, our internal clock is altered and becomes as worthless as my flashing alarm clock was this morning.
Our body's timepiece becomes "uncoordinated" which leads to altered metabolism and weight gain.
After reading the article, I was hyped about soaking up the rays to shrink my waistline while energy transferred from that brilliant celestial orb to my earthbound, over-weight body.
This fantastic health advice comes on a day when all a person could be exposed to this morning is doom and gloom, rain, low hanging clouds, with a possibility of hail and high winds.
Not a single ray of sunlight can be found.
I'm hoping for a bright sunshiny day tomorrow so I can put my new knowledge into action.
I can't think of a better diet than pulling up a lawn chair, sipping a cup of coffee, and relaxing in the morning sun.
It beats the heck out of the treadmill or exercise bike.
copyright (c) April 2014 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com sources: Northwestern University press release: "Morning rays keep off pounds." Research funded by National Institutes of Health.
http://esciencenews.com/articles/2014/04/03/morning.rays.keep.pounds "Exposure to Morning Light Can Help You Lose Weight." http://www.hngn.com/articles/28004/20140403/exposure-to-morning-light-can-help-you-lose-weight.htm Money.USnews.com: "The Heavy Price of  Losing Weight."  http://money.usnews.com/money/personal-finance/articles/2013/01/02/the-heavy-price-of-losing-weight
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 27, 2014>
Before Alzheimer's came into my life, I considered it to be an equal opportunity disease affecting males and females the same way.
During my years of involvement, I began to realize that Alzheimer's had a bigger impact on women than on men.
The 2014 Alzheimer's Disease Facts and Figures includes a "Special Report: Women and Alzheimer's Disease."  This report highlights several studies that bear witness to the higher burden the disease has on women.
Out of all Americans with Alzheimer's, two-thirds are women.
Why?
The most obvious factor is age.
Women have longer lifespans and are more likely to reach the age of highest risk.
Women are more concerned than men about developing Alzheimer's, and with good reason.
A sixty-five year old woman has a 20 percent lifetime risk of developing dementia during her lifetime.
I don't know about you, but I'm not happy with those odds.
I admit that before Jim developed dementia, I never gave much consideration to how unfair Alzheimer's is to the person with the disease and the caregiver.
I had no concept of the breadth and scope of the disease--how all consuming it can be.
Being a caregiver for my husband was never a part of my vision of our life together.
Jim never seemed like the type of person who would ever be anything but decisive, a man of strong convictions, protective, creative, and loving.
Never in my wildest imagination could I have envisioned the turn our lives would take when he developed dementia.
And certainly, if an Alzheimer's type of dementia had ever entered my mind, I would have thought of him as an elderly man, not one who wouldn't live to see his sixtieth birthday.
The job of caregiver falls more often on women.
They are two and a half times more likely than men to be that caregiver who provides the around the clock care for a loved one who is in the late stages of the disease.
These female caregivers are made up of daughters, wives, siblings, friends, and in younger onset--mothers.
In a study of caregivers, indications are that females are substantially more likely than males to provide intimate personal care for their loved one with Alzheimer's.
Just like me, other women caregivers take on bathing, dressing, toileting, and changing adult diapers.
Caring for a loved one is hard work and stressful.
Women report a higher level of emotional stress than men (62 percent vs. 52 percent) and greater physical stress (47 percent vs. 24 percent).
Women's employment is affected adversely by caregiving.
Twice as many women as men give up employment entirely to be caregivers.
Seven times as many women as men go from working full-time to part-time in order to be a caregiver.
I was in my forties when Jim developed dementia and worked full-time.
Quitting work wasn't an option for me.
There were times when the challenges of juggling a job and caregiving seemed overwhelming.
Jim required only about four hours of sleep at night and that meant that I often went to work sleep deprived and emotionally drained.
When I hired caregivers to come into my home, they would often arrive late, or call at the last minute that they couldn't come.
Because they were undependable, it made me, as an employee, feel undependable too.
Fortunately, my employer allowed me the flexibility I needed to work around caregiving issues.
They knew that from time-to-time I would receive a phone call and have to go home to tend to the latest challenge--wandering, refusing to let someone else do something for him, or just to comfort him when he was scared or depressed.
I was young compared to most women who cared for spouses with Alzheimer's.
When I found myself feeling defeated, I couldn't help but wonder how elderly ladies managed full-time caregiving.
Think about it--as a woman you are more likely to be a caregiver for a loved one with Alzheimer's, and then, after years of caregiving, you are more likely to develop the disease.
We women have a large stake in ending Alzheimer's.
Our brains matter to us, and we want to keep them healthy throughout our lifetimes.
We need to join together as women, as caring people, as advocates to end Alzheimer's now.
copyright (c) March 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 18, 2014>
More than five million Americans have Alzheimer's disease including 110,000 Missourians.
With 10,000 baby boomers turning 65 each day, cases of Alzheimer's are expected to skyrocket.
Alzheimer's is the most expensive disease and has a negative impact on our nation's economy.
Alzheimer's disease cost the nation $203 billion in 2013, and by 2050 it is expected to reach $1.2 trillion annually.
The rising costs for Alzheimer's care and services threaten to bankrupt Medicare and Medicaid.
Alzheimer's takes a toll on families--both financial and emotional.
News of a blood test to predict who will develop Alzheimer's disease has been met with excitement and trepidation.
By identifying those at risk for Alzheimer's, researchers might find success with medications that have not worked in the later stages.
New insights into how Alzheimer's affects the brain would help researchers understand the disease better.
Without a cure, prevention, or effective treatment, the question arises--who would want to know if they were going to develop Alzheimer's?
Currently, fifty percent of Americans who have Alzheimer's do not know they have the disease, but nearly ninety percent want to know if they have the disease.
The Health Outcomes, Planning, and Education (HOPE) for Alzheimer's Act would provide Medicare services to diagnose Alzheimer's disease.
Early diagnosis would allow people to get their affairs in order while they had the capacity to do so.
They could make lifestyle changes that research indicates could delay the onset.
A healthy diet, exercise, and remaining socially engaged has many health benefits and has long been considered a boost for cognition.
The HOPE Act addresses problems with how the healthcare system currently works.
Once a person has been diagnosed, HOPE for Alzheimer's ensures that the newly diagnosed person and care providers will receive vital information with treatment options and support services available.
This Act promotes open communication between patient, the medical team, and caregiver.
It would require documentation of the diagnostic evaluation to be provided in the patient's medical record.
This is a huge improvement!
With the complete medical history in hand, care providers can help manage other diseases the person with dementia might have.
When my husband developed dementia at 49, the diagnostic process was lengthy.
I kept a log of his symptoms, medications, drug reactions, and other health concerns.
I shared this list with the many physicians involved in diagnosing and treating him.
Not having this information would have adversely affected his care.
Being a caregiver for a loved one with dementia is a life-changing situation.
Jim's dementia is the reason I have been an advocate on state and national levels for the past fifteen years.
In April, my sister, Roberta Fischer and I will join more than 750 Alzheimer's advocates in Washington, D.C. for the Advocacy Forum.
Along with other Missouri advocates, we will visit Senator Roy Blunt (R), Senator Claire McCaskill (D), and Representative Vicky Hartzler (R).
The fight to end Alzheimer's is a bipartisan effort.
When legislation that makes so much common sense comes along, it is time for everyone who has experienced Alzheimer's firsthand to write that email, make a phone call, or drop by a district office.
I urge you to join your voice to ours by contacting your U.S. senators (S 709) and U.S. representative (HR 1507) and ask them to co-sponsor the HOPE for Alzheimer's Act.
No one should ever be without HOPE.
copyright (c) March 2014 by L. S. Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 10, 2014>
I often receive offers to endorse products or promote others' agendas on my blog.
I usually ignore or decline these offers.
Recently, Maria Corder with Avante Press asked if I would like to read An Absent Mind, a novel about Alzheimer's scheduled for a March 2014 release.
I asked for an electronic version to read.
I am an avid reader and often have a couple of novels going at the same time.
It so happened that I was reading two thrillers when she sent the manuscript to me.
I downloaded the book onto my Kindle and hoped to get to it before long.
It takes an intriguing novel to get me to put aside a James Patterson book.
When I opened An Absent Mind, I was hooked from the beginning when Saul Reimer began to tell his story:  "I was always considered a bit peculiar, so no one probably suspected anything until a dreary October afternoon when I removed my gray flannel trousers, opened the front door of my house, and ambled down the street." The most compelling dimension of this novel is the intertwining of the perspectives of Saul's family--his wife Monique, his dependable daughter Florence, his narcissistic son Joey, and Dr. Tremblay.
Each family member's story unfolds as the Alzheimer's diagnosis changes their lives, their relationships with each other, as well as with Saul.
An Absent Mind does justice to exploring the thoughts, motivations, fears, and emotions of a person with dementia and his family members.
Saul takes you into the heart of a person who knows something is going terribly wrong.
We feel his fear of what is going to happen, and his suspicion of family, especially Monique, plotting against him.
Saul's unfiltered views are often humorous as he makes observations about his family.
About Joey, he says,  "...except Joey, who can't sit for more than the time it takes him to gulp down a milk shake.
I often wonder what happens when he's in the bathroom.
With his attention span, he probably can't sit still until it's time to reach for the toilet paper."  Florence is the Reimer child with a strong sense of responsibility.
She and her irresponsible brother grew apart over the years, but through necessity they form a fragile relationship.
The family pulls together to try to figure out how to deal with Saul.
They disagree on the best approach to make those difficult decisions like how to take away the car keys.
Each one, in his or her own way, has to find a way to adjust to the changes in Saul during his downward spiral into the Alzheimer's abyss.
I have to laugh about Monique's account of Saul ordering magazine subscriptions, aluminum siding, and hired carpet cleaners when they had oak floors.
It brings back memories of Jim, the telemarketer's best friend.
It is easy for me to relate to Monique--her frustration as she struggles to care for Saul at home, and her guilt when she realizes it is "time" to find a better solution.
I understand her need to be present daily at the facility, feeding Saul and watching after him.
I understand her frustration with Joey when he doesn't seem to do his fair share.
My heart aches for Monique when Saul arises from his apathetic state for a brief moment of clarity and calls her chou-fleur.
This powerful moment demonstrates that Alzheimer's erases a lifetime of memories, but doesn't empty the soul of love.
The mark of a good novel is one that makes you laugh and cry, and An Absent Mind hits the target dead center.
It is obvious Eric Rill knows the devastation of a loved one with Alzheimer's, and yet tells this story in an uplifting manner.
An Absent Mind is riveting from beginning to end as we walk the journey with the Reimer family.
copyright (c) March 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com Eric Rill's An Absent Mind is available on Amazon.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 4, 2014>
Well, the purpose of having a celebrity spokesperson is to get attention.
Having Seth Rogen testify at the February 26 Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health & Human Services met that goal.
In his opening remarks, Rogen admitted that being called an expert in something was "cool." He said,  "I don't know if you know who I am at all.
You told me you never saw Knocked Up, Chairman, so...it's a little insulting." Senator Tom Harkin showed uncharacteristic humor when he wagered that this was the first time in a congressional hearing that the words 'knocked up' had been heard.
I've been to several Senate Hearings on Alzheimer's while at the Advocacy Forum in Washington, D.C.
I don't recall any where the audience was laughing.
These are usually deadly serious meetings about a deadly disease.
I can remember one hearing where tissue boxes were being passed up and down the rows when a young lady testified about familial early-onset Alzheimer's.
I believe it had to be one of the most tragic stories I had ever heard.
Her entire family had a 50/50 chance of facing the same unrelenting fatal disease.
I watched the Webcast of the hearing and although Rogen received the bulk of the media attention, he was not the only person to testify.
Scientists and economists provided extensive testimony on  Alzheimer's and answered the senators' questions.
Dr. Richard Hodes (NIH) talked about research on how a healthy lifestyle could be an intervention for Alzheimer's.
Although still early in the research process, he recommended diet and exercise as a way to improve overall health.
One of the people to testify was former Congressman Dennis Moore.
I've met Dennis on previous D.C. trips when he joined Missouri advocates to talk to our Senators.
Dennis is a warm, personable man who has a heartfelt way of connecting with legislators when he speaks about Alzheimer's.
Seeing one of their own with early onset Alzheimer's is an eye-opener for many of them.
Another person who testified, Dr. Michael Hurd, researcher for the Rand Corporation, talked about the monetary cost of dementia.
The annual cost of dementia in 2010 was $109 billion.
When you factor in informal care, the amount increases to $160-$250 billion.
Alzheimer's is the most costly disease.
National Institute of Health Director Dr. Francis Collins who explained the limitation on Alzheimer's research was simply funding.
Only one in six peer-reviewed research projects are funded.
The brightest minds often research other diseases that are well funded.
Simply put, our country has not provided the resources to find a cure for Alzheimer's.
Maybe it's because dementia is a disease that still has a stigma--or as Rogen said, "Americans whisper the word Alzheimer's, because their government whispers the word Alzheimer's." Laced in with his humorous remarks, which is indeed an attention getter, Rogen shared the story of his mother-in-law who developed early onset Alzheimer's at fifty-five.
By sixty, she was unable to speak, feed or dress herself.
While that image sank in, Rogen admitted that the dire situation caused him, "a lazy, self-involved, generally self-medicated man-child to start an entire charity organization." His Hilarity for Charity raises money for Alzheimer's research and for families dealing with dementia.
Senator Moran began the hearing with Alzheimer's information, but I want to leave you with some of his thoughts.
Every 68 seconds another American develops Alzheimer's.
In the United States more than 5.2 million, and 44 million worldwide have the disease.
Alzheimer's is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States.
It has no cure, no diagnostic test, and no treatment.
A Rand Corporation study predicts that within 30 years the cost of dementia is expected to bypass cancer and heart disease.
Even a five-year delay in the onset, would mean a total savings of $447 billion by 2050.
The effort to find effective treatments and a cure causes the most fiscally conservative and those who are the most caring and compassionate to come together.
Moran said that we need to fully commit to finding a cure in the next decade.
He called finding a cure "The defining challenge of our generation."  Moran said, "The gift that we all could provide for every American, for every American family, is a special gift...it is the gift of hope."   To watch the hearing:  http://www.appropriations.senate.gov/webcasts.cfm?method=webcasts.view&id=ac30b75a-65a5-4958-8260-e64f070beaf7 copyright (c) March 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 25, 2014>
Music has the ability to bring joy into our hearts and give us happy feet when the beat calls for dancing.
Music has always been a part of my life although I can't play an instrument and have a hard time carrying a tune.
My mom, brother Jimmy, and other family members take their music to several area nursing homes on a regular basis.
Monthly concerts in nursing homes is a natural way for my mom to share her love of music.
Her entire family was musical and entertained at every family gathering with down home country and gospel music.
That was a different time and different era in my life.
On Saturdays, we visited Grandma and Grandpa Whittle and played with cousins while the grownups filled the night air with the sounds of music.
Get-togethers were the norm instead of the exception they are now.
Even after I married, the musical way of life continued.
Jim's family was chocked full of musicians and at every opportunity, guitars, fiddles, banjos, were taken out of cases and kitchen chairs clustered together while everyone sang and played their favorite tunes.
One day last week, on an otherwise normal day, I felt a real longing to visit with my mom.
First, I called to make sure she was home, and then made the hour drive to visit.
My brother Jimmy was there, and just like old times, he and Mom played some of their old favorites and a few new ones.
The music took me back--sometimes to childhood.
When mom sang "The Way I Am" it reminded me of Jim before dementia.
Music was therapy for Jim and he played his guitar every morning.
He loved gospel, country, and cowboy songs.
Even after he lost the ability to play, he still enjoyed listening.
For a long time, he carried a Walkman to listen to his favorite tunes.
At the nursing home, we turned his TV to the Country Music Channel and kept a drawer full of his favorite music cassettes.
Music provides a nonmedical method to decrease agitation and behavioral problems in people with dementia.
Music is effective in all stages of the disease and can stimulate happy memories even in the late stages.
It is important to fit the music to the person.
While one person might appreciate big band, others might prefer jazz, country, gospel, or old time rock and roll.
Music elevates mood and stimulates memory for everyone.
Just last week, I saw a question on Facebook asking if anyone remembered Gordon Lightfoot and could name one of his songs.
I paused the show I was watching, The Blacklist, and felt compelled to answer the question.
The posts were full of "The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald," but the Gordon Lightfoot song that always meant the most to me was "Sundown." It had been years since I heard the song, but I instantly thought of Jim and when my kids were young.
Jim used to sing that song and it always makes me think of the seventies--Jim with his sideburns and me with long straight hair parted in the middle.
The song ignites memories of youth, love, hard but happy times.
I typed in "Sundown" and restarted my movie.
About two minutes later, Gordon Lightfoot's smooth voice began singing "Sundown." Memories upon memories.
I thought it just a little beyond strange that the song followed so quickly on the heels of the Facebook question.
I believe that when music plays a big part of life, it can be a way to connect with people who no longer share our physical world.
Was it just a coincidence that I saw a question that led to a specific song more than three decades old and then heard it on a TV show within minutes of each other?
Maybe.
Maybe not.
It could have been a gentle auditory reminder that our life force doesn't end with death.
In my quiet house the only sound I hear right now with my physical ears is the gurgling of the refrigerator and the buzzing of an impatient dryer.
But in my mind, I still hear soul soothing echoes of laughter and music from long ago.
copyright (c) Feb. 2014 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 18, 2014>
Our sense of smell is a door that opens our memories.
Sometimes the actual scent can be elusive, while the memory is strong.
Yesterday, I walked into a room and for some reason it reminded me of a funeral home.
That isn't exactly a good memory, and I'm not even sure what it was that made me think of it.
Sometimes, a certain combination of floral arrangements will ignite that memory for me, but this room had no flowers in it.
On a better note, one of my favorite scents is coffee.
That signifies the beginnings of most of the days of my life.
It's like waking up to a new page in a favorite book.
Coffee and Jim are intertwined in my memory.
He loved his coffee, drank it half a cup at a time so that it stayed hot.
To this day, if my coffee isn't hot, I can't drink it.
After shaves and perfumes can be associated with certain people.
I saw a movie one time, I think it was The Notebook, where a man tried to find the scent that his wife wore and couldn't find it.
Eventually, he realized the smell was shampoo instead of perfume.
Smell is our strongest connection to those special people in our memories whether it is cologne or just the smell of their skin.
I hate the smell of Vick's Vapor-rub.
It makes me think of being miserable with a cold when I was a kid.
That's why I only use Mentholatum for stuffy head colds.
For the same reason, I can't stand the smell of wintergreen--Pepto-Bismol.
It does come in a cherry flavor now, but I'm sure the smell of that would make me think of cough syrup.
How about the distinctive smell of the doctor's office?
Don't notice that so much anymore, but Dr. Hoffa's office had a scent like no other place and a whiff of that antiseptic/medicine smell will take me back in a heartbeat.
Our brains link countless smells to events.
Does the smell of popcorn make you think of going to the movies?
Does a dank odor make you think of the showers after gym class in school?
Because of the known connection between scent and memory, researchers have developed an oPhone.
Its cylinder shape is nothing like a regular phone and you can't use it to have a conversation with another person.
Instead of sounds, the emails, tweets, and texts are odors.
It has an oChip that produces over 300 scents now, but eventually it will produce many more.
The scents are complex--not just a single odor, but more like real life where a combination of odors makes a memory.
The oPhone is currently being used to provide a "sensory experience" in a coffee shop in Paris--sort of smell before you buy.
The hopes are that the oPhone has more value than a gimmicky marketing tool.
In fact, with the close association between smell and memory, it is believed that the oPhone could stimulate memory in people with Alzheimer's.
Since it may be a long time before this product is available, you could try your own sniff tests to see if it will jog your loved one's memory.
No one knows the scents that bring back favorite memories more than you.
The smell of a fresh baked cinnamon roll makes me think of my wonderful mother-in-law.
She's long gone, but the smell of her homemade baked goods live in my brain associated with the smell of cinnamon.
Of course, that would call for a good cup of coffee from the pot that seemed to have no bottom.
Her house was always filled with baked goods and love.
I can hear the laughter, the sounds of a pitch game, and Jim strumming his guitar in the background.
I can plainly smell the memory.
copyright (c) February 2014 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com  Source: http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/272565.php
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 10, 2014>
My idea of a quad is to become completely engrossed in the Olympics every four years.
Now that I have a DVR, I can pretty much watch every minute of televised action.
I find myself sitting in front of the TV at midnight watching the luge.
Hello, don't they all pretty much look alike rocketing down an ice slide at 80 miles per hour?
What about that skateboarding?
Those folks are crazy.
They risk  life and limb for a shot at the gold.
And one little mess-up--a bad landing after spinning, flipping, performing death-defying antics in the air--and  all is for nothing.
What about that girl that broke her helmet?
She looked like she was out cold, but about the time help arrived, she was back on her feet snowboarding to the finish line.
Of course, she had failed to get a medal or a decent score, but what a picture of success to see someone overcome that type of fall.
What about the athletes who are broken and pinned back together, performing with broken ribs, recovering from surgery, or performing with a shot of Novocain to dull the pain?
Watching the Olympics really has made me think about the perception of success and failure.
One person's bronze medal means failure while signifying another person's success.
Of course, I always want to see the United States snag the gold, but, hey, when you compete against the best athletes in the world, you can't always expect to be top dog.
Contests are won and lost by one-hundredths of a second.
It seems strange for commentators to talk about how a lap in speed skating is slow if it is over 30 seconds.
Olga Graf, from Russia, was spurred on by the home-country crowd and was pleased as punch to win a bronze medal.
On the other hand, a bronze medal had the USA's mogul star Hannah Kearney in tears.
She expected gold, not bronze.
She was so emotional she couldn't finish the interview, but turned her head as the tears flowed.
Everyone wants gold, even silver just doesn't seem good enough.
You almost have to admire someone who so firmly believes he or she is so good that it is unfair that another person in the world is a few nanoseconds faster or can jump a tad higher, or was just plain having a good day to offset your bad one.
Bode Miller missed the podium in the men's downhill, but in a way considered his run a success.
He met his main objective: "Not kill myself was the primary (objective)." My favorite event is figure skating, and we had a treat this year with the new team event.
The good news was that we had some excellent skaters that dug us out of the hole made by the first two skaters.
Davis  and White along with Ashley Wagner  put the USA in the top five teams to vie for medals.
The bad news was that with the scoring system, we could never get higher than bronze.
The Ashley Wagner frown that has gone viral on the Internet is not because of the bronze, but because of a much lower score than she expected.
For some who have no hopes of winning, the Olympic experience is reward enough.
Take the Cool Running Jamaican bobsled team.
A simple thing like losing their luggage, and equipment, on the trip over didn't deter them from having a good time.
They just smile and everyone loves them.
They are successes without a medal of any color.
It's no wonder with the pressure to perform nerves can overcome athletes chosen to represent their country in the Olympics.
We all know that confidence trumps nerves every time.
It isn't always the best of the best that turn in the outstanding performance.
It may be the person with no expectations, no pressure.
We can learn a lesson from the Olympians: If you "fail" to be the best, it is still a giant leap above those who let fear of failure take them out of the competition.
copyright (c) Feb 2014 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 2, 2014>
Grandpa Everett Whittle and mules Jack and Pete Today has become a lazy Sunday morning.
Between the ice and small layer of snow, the world seems to be at a complete standstill.
At least I am personally at a standstill since there's no way I'm venturing out.
This hasn't been the weekend I planned, for sure.
I thought Saturday would be spent watching my oldest granddaughter play in a basketball tournament, but when the roads became hazardous with ice, they cancelled the tourney.
Today should have been Writers' Guild, but that, too, was cancelled.
After watching Joel Osteen, I picked up an old magazine--part of my retirement plan is to read and recycle all the magazines that have been "saved" for reading--and saw an article "Where Have the Quail Gone?" That question has plagued me for years along with where have all the whippoorwills gone?
Or for that matter, what the heck has happened to the cottontails?
When I was growing up, the night was full of the quail's "bob-bob white" call harmonized by "whippoorwill." I'm not sure when the sounds disappeared from the night, I just know it has been a long time, and I miss the music of their calls drawing me back to simpler yesterdays.
Rabbits were never that plentiful in the Ozarks where I grew up, but when I moved north of Sedalia, rabbits were everywhere.
It was not unusual to see dozens of them on a single trip to town.
Now?
I've seen one rabbit this winter.
I miss the night sounds of my youth and the cottontail's footprints in the snow.
It may just seem like small losses, but several small losses add up to big ones.
We know the major losses in life are the people and places we loved.
Last week, I pulled up Facebook to see pictures of my Grandpa Capps and my Grandpa Whittle on the same day.
Funny, how many of the photos I remember seeing, while others I had never seen before.
My brother posted a picture of my Grandpa Whittle with his mules.
What were the mules' names?
For some reason, this question plagued me along with where have all the bobwhites, whippoorwills, and rabbits gone.
I asked the question, and when I had no response, I dredged up the names "Jack and Jenny." No one on Facebook knew the answer so I called my mom.
She consulted with my Aunt Lebetta and they came up with Jack and Pete.
That sounded right to me.
Old photos are keys that unlock forgotten memories.
They are strong reminders of people long lost.
Seeing a photo of my grandma makes me remember how her hair felt when she let me braid it for her.
After I braided it, surely not as neatly as she could have, she would pin her hair in coils on her head and push in tortoise shell combs.
I was close to the three grandparents who lived close to me.
I regret that I never knew my Grandma Capps who lived in Kansas.
I've read her stories in the family genealogy book and admire her for her struggles and hardships in life.
She told the stories of her youth and not so much about when she raised a large family as a divorced mom during a time when that wasn't as usual, or acceptable, as it is today.
Loss is around us.
When the house is silent as it is now, and the yard barren and empty, no cars passing by on the road, loss is evident.
It seemed that no matter how bad the roads, Jim would have been out on them.
Before we lived next door to his mom's house, we would have ventured out.
She would have a pot of coffee on, homemade biscuits in the oven, and a big skillet of gravy cooking.
My Bisquick biscuits and gravy tasted good this morning, although they fell short of the real-deal that lives in my memories of the yesterdays of my life.
But the thing is, the way to deal with loss is to make new and better memories by living each day to the fullest.
I may be stuck at home, but that's not a bad thing.
Family is a phone call, an Internet click away.
I have work to do, and I'm happy and healthy.
Yesterday lives in my memory, today is what I make of it, and tomorrow is full of adventure.
Copyright (c) February 2014 by L. S. Fisher  www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 30, 2014>
Last weekend, I fixed a cup of tea while my youngest granddaughter told me about her week.
"What have you been doing lately, Grandma Linda?" she asked.
"Well," I said as I repeatedly dunked my tea bag with a spoon, "lately I seem to just spend a lot of time here at home.
Some days, I don't even go outside."  She looked into the candy dish, turned, and smiled at me.
"You know, Grandma Linda, this house holds a lot of happy memories for you." I looked up from my steaming cup of tea and said, "You are so right.
It is full of happy memories." This is the house that Jim and I built--and I mean that literally.
I'm talking countless hours of lifting two by fours, hammering nails, laughing and arguing about where the walls should be, how many outlets each room needed, where to put phone jacks, how to cover up a boo-boo.
Talk about a house built with love.
We didn't have much money or a big bank account, just a dream that we could build our own home if we made enough sacrifices.
We borrowed as little as possible and managed to have the house completely paid off shortly after we finished building it.
Of course, it took several years to build the house, but as soon as we moved in, happy memories were in the making.
Our sons were nearly grown by that time so it wasn't long before they married and started their own families giving Grandpa Jim and I more family to love.
Now, Jim is gone and lives only in our memories.
I recently retired, and I'm taking well to my new lifestyle.
Although I may not make it out the door every day, I always find much to do and my life is still full and busy.
After jumping out of bed bright and early yesterday for some Alzheimer's volunteer work in town,  I was back to my new routine this morning.
I woke up at 8:00 and finished the novel I was reading.
I couldn't seem to stop reading the intriguing story of family secrets, loss, and learning to live again.
I guess I could relate to the importance of breaking away from sad thoughts and finding a pathway beyond past heartaches or failures to a new future.
Different, yes, but still something to fill my heart with joy.
I took time to read the paper this morning--not the usual headline skimming method I usually use.
Normally, I do not read obituaries if I don't recognize the names.
I just move on to something else.
This morning, I took time to read the two obituaries printed in our small town paper.
These were people who lived and left their imprint on the hearts of their families, and I just felt a compulsion to read their stories.
Finis "Ed" Sumpter, 76, was a decorated Air Force veteran.
He served two tours of duty in Vietnam and was awarded the bronze star.
He retired after twenty years with the rank of Chief Master Sergeant.
Then, I read 91 year old Mary Cauvel's story.
She had been an aircraft electronics assembler for North American Aeronautics and worked on the Apollo Program in the mid-sixties.
Here were two people whose stories I would have missed completely if I hadn't taken a moment to read the brief summary of their lives.
Can you imagine the hardships they overcame in their lifetimes so they could build happy memories of people, places, and events?
Life should be full of happy memories, and the trick is to focus on those life moments.
Long after houses and people are gone, traces of happy memories live on and on in our hearts.
copyright January 2014 by L. S. Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 22, 2014>
Sometimes being an Alzheimer's advocate can be frustrating.
It seems that our voices of reason often fall on deaf ears.
I've gone to Washington, D. C., thirteen consecutive times to ask for an increase in funding for Alzheimer's research.
Successes are the super exciting part of being an advocate.
Last week we experienced an unprecedented victory in the battle against Alzheimer's.
The Alzheimer's Association and more than 600,000 advocates fist pumped when $122 million increase in Alzheimer's research funding sailed through Congress and was signed by the President.
Alzheimer's Association CEO, Harry Johns, said these additional resources could "convert scientific opportunity into life-changing outcomes." Here's a breakdown of the funding: $100 million for the National Institute on Aging for research, $3.3 million to support caregivers, $4 million to train health professionals on Alzheimer's issues, $10.5 million to expand home and community based services, and $4.2 million for outreach activities to increase awareness.
Another $30 million will be used for brain research that can impact Alzheimer's and other brain diseases.
Increased funding for Alzheimer's creates hope for more than five million Americans living with Alzheimer's disease.
An Alzheimer's cure is possibly the largest single factor toward saving the future of Medicare and Medicaid.
Compare these numbers:  Spending on Alzheimer's research in 2013--$484 Million NIH+$80 million directors' budget, compared to Medicare spending of $107 billion and Medicaid of $35 billion spent on those with Alzheimer's disease.
Is this a wise use of our money?
I've lost a loved one to an Alzheimer's type of dementia and know it is virtually impossible to describe that decade of loss with mere words.
I often try, but saying how it was for us, and how it is for millions now, falls far short of the experience.
The sad thing is that it usually takes a personal experience before a person reaches that level of comprehension.
That means another person, another family, another circle of friends offer support and love to ease the inevitable outcome of an incurable, virtually untreatable, disease.
A disease that unravels years of accomplishments, skills, hopes and dreams.
An advocate's job is to keep chipping away at the hope for a cure--to remain unwavering through the ups and downs of being a voice for millions who would have their voices silenced.
To continue the battle of education about a disease that is not a joke about cute little old men and women whose forgetfulness makes us laugh.
It's about slamming home the reality that this disease causes pain and heartache for entire families.
Families who are often caught off guard by the ugly fact that Alzheimer's can happen in the best person--in the most brilliant person.
Before this recent increase, the National Institutes of Health estimated that $484 million would be available for Alzheimer's research funding in 2014.
The amount spent on Alzheimer's research is small compared to billions spent on other diseases.
We do not want funding decreased to other major killer diseases, but we want the same success for Alzheimer's disease.
We want to have survivors at our Walks!
copyright (c) January 2014 by L.S.
Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 13, 2014>
How many people do you know that have a mind like a steel trap?
These people can seem to remember everything, and then some.
Don't you just sometimes wonder how much of that stuff they make up?
I read an article this morning in American Profile called "Flex Your Memory Muscle."  With my interest in Alzheimer's, any article memory related catches my attention.
This article was particularly interesting since I had never heard of the USA Memory Championships--or if I'd ever heard of the contest, I forgot all about it.
These "mental athletes" are known as mnemonists.
These people learn a vast amount of information--it would almost seem the more useless, the better.
Yep.
One guy, Johnny Briones, spends two hours a day memorizing the order of a randomly shuffled deck of cards.
That might be a useful skill for Vegas, but don't know how much it would matter in the real world.
I digress.
The point is to hone your memory skills through these mental exercises.
Use it or lose it.
When a person has Alzheimer's, their hippocampus, where short term memory resides, shrinks.
Dr. Majid Fotuhi, author of Boost Your Brain: The New Art and Science Behind Enhanced Brain Performance, likens memorization to "pushups for your hippocampus." I don't know about you, but I think my hippocampus could use some exercise.
I do have a vast amount of trivia stored in my brain, no doubt cluttering up my cortex.
My poor cortex has all this information safely stored away, but with all those little chunks of info, retrieving it, especially when I need it, is not likely to be that darned easy.
So often, I'll know that I know something, but can't bring it to the forefront of my mind at the right time.
No, I'll wake up out of a sound sleep with the illusive piece of information I couldn't retrieve when I needed it.
Several months ago, my youngest son observed that, "Mom, your memory isn't as good as it used to be." I agreed, but had to add, "As long as I remember well enough to do my job, I'm fine.
When I retire, I won't have to remember anything anymore."  So, soon after I quit going to work on a regular basis, I promptly forgot a hair appointment.
Okay, so this had happened before--once in the last thirty years.
How did I forget it when it was on my Google calendar, that set off an alarm on my cell phone?
Well, I was working on an anthology that used a different Gmail account.
Therefore, my Google Calendar wasn't up like it usually is.
My cell phone buzzes constantly, so I just ignored it.
I was blissfully ignorant until about two hours too late when suddenly, "ding, ding, ding," that little piece of info made its way to the forefront of my brain.
People with Alzheimer's lose their short-term memory and the long-term memory becomes more vivid and seems to be recent, rather than distant events.
It only adds to the confusion when they can no longer remember or recognize a spouse or children.
There are a few things about memory that are different from person to person that has nothing to do with ability to retain knowledge.
It has to do with selected memory.
Some people select to remember the good times, the happy times, and not just the bad things.
I tend to be that way.
I'm only going to pass through this world once, and I want my memories to be of the good times.
Memorization comes through repetition, focus, and retrieval from the folds of your brain.
If you don't make a habit of focusing on the bad, those memories will become more faded.
They may not go away, but they also won't determine the course of your life.
Each one of us has bad memories, possibly even horrid memories.
We control the focus and quality of our memories.
It is my brain, my hippocampus, my cortex.
Do I want to use my "memory muscle" to make my life better, or miserable?
I choose better!
I will never be a mnemonist, but I hope to keep my good memories, happy memories for a long, long time.
I'd take that over memorizing a deck of cards any day.
copyright (c) by L. S. Fisher, January 2014 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 8, 2014>
Sometimes research verifies what physicians or people have learned through good old fashioned trial and error.
Without a cure or effective treatment for Alzheimer's, many have tried alternative methods.
One of the many alternative treatments for Alzheimer's is Vitamin E.  Jim took 800 milligrams (1200 IU) of Vitamin E a day.
He took this under a physician's care.
The thing that impressed me about Vitamin E wasn't that it made a lot of difference in Jim's cognitive abilities, but rather an unrelated condition.
Jim had a sore on his lip that just wouldn't go away.
Our family physician decided it needed to be biopsied.
At about that same time, his neurologist put him on Vitamin E. Within two weeks, his lip was completely healed.
The most recent study of Vitamin E conducted on 613 veterans shows promise as a means of slowing the progression of Alzheimer's--something that traditional medications have failed to do.
Yes, the disease still progressed in the study group taking a 2,000 IU (1,333 mg.) daily dose of Vitamin E. The good news is that the group retained ability to do basic tasks longer than the group that took a placebo.
In fact, the slower rate of decline amounted to about a six month delay in progression.
Six months may not seem like much on the surface, but at the Alzheimer's Forums I've attended, statistics have shown that any treatment that will slow the progression of Alzheimer's amounts to huge benefits.
If a person can delay going into a nursing home by six months, it saves the family an average of $248 per day, or $45,260 for the room alone.
As we all know, the family pays for a log of "extras" when a loved one is place in a nursing home.
Like many dietary supplements, Vitamin E has met with mixed reviews.
An early study of Vitamin E was considered a warning since that study showed a higher death rate in the people who took more than 400 IU of Vitamin E a day.
Most studies indicate that toxicity occurs when doses exceed 3000 IU.
This is not surprising since when a Vitamin K deficiency is involved Vitamin E can cause prolonged bleeding and affect the blood's ability to clot.
Other signs of toxicity are double vision, fatigue, muscle weakness, and diarrhea.
The National Academy of Sciences set the tolerable upper limit at 1,000 milligrams per day.
The Recommended daily dosage of Vitamin E is 15 milligrams (22.5 IU).
As you can easily see, it is a quantum leap from 22.5 IU to 2000 IU.
Vitamin E deficiency can cause various symptoms: gallbladder disease, liver disease, celiac disease, peripheral neuropathy, and skin problems.
What is Vitamin E anyway?
It is a group of fat-soluble vitamins that are active throughout the entire body.
Tocopherols come in four different forms--first names of Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and Delta.
Alpha tocopherol was used in the study.
Vitamin E has been studied in treatments of other conditions.
Vitamin E protects the skin from UV damage.
Alpha tocopherol reduces the risk of bladder cancer.
Most supplements contain alpha tocopherol, but it is gamma-tocopherol that fights prostate cancer.
Vitamin E may play a role in the prevention or treatment of a long list of conditions which includes everything from acne to several types of cancer.
Some of the biggies, besides cancer of course, are diabetes and Alzheimer's disease.
Before going on Vitamin E, you need to check with your physician to make sure the supplement will not interact with other medications or make another condition worse.
In the meantime, you can follow Popeye's example and eat your spinach.
It is an excellent source of Vitamin E. Don't like spinach?
Try Swiss chard or turnip greens for other top sources.
If you prefer nuts, sunflower seeds and almonds are both very good sources.
The really good thing about getting Vitamin E from foods is that no known side effects from food exist.
Even if you take supplements, eating Vitamin E rich foods enhance the benefits.
I think Popeye was really on to something when he said, "I'm strong to the finish 'cause I eats me spinach." He was loading up on Vitamin E. And to top it off, he loved Olive Oil, and that just happens to be another source of Vitamin E. Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher January 2014 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 31, 2013>
What better way to end the year than with a blast from the past?
I checked my PO Box yesterday and found an order for Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love.
It was obviously from the ad that ran in Rural Missouri in 2007 when the book first came out.
It happens occasionally.
Someone is browsing through their old copies, come across the ad, and order a book.
This afternoon, I went into Facebook and saw where someone posted a note on a vote for my blog in Healthline's contest, "Did you see the ad for Linda's book in Rural Missouri?"  What?
I had just gotten my Rural Missouri today.
I pulled it out, leafed through it and there was the ad.
Looks just as good as it did when the book was hot off the press.
The story of the anthology is a story in itself.
I had never published a book before, but after joining the Columbia Chapter of the Missouri Writers' Guild, I learned a lot about self publishing.
I married that with my fundraising experience and came up with the idea to get sponsors, publish a book of Alzheimer's stories, and give the proceeds to the Alzheimer's Association.
I pitched the idea to the staff at the Mid-Missouri Chapter office and they didn't think I was crazy, so I proceeded.
One small problem to overcome.
How could I get the stories?
I sent emails to all my Alzheimer's contacts, posted on message boards, and spread the word.
Then, Jim McCarty of Rural Missouri asked me to write an op-ed about Alzheimer's and the anthology.
Once it was published, the stories came pouring in.
The Chapter made the selections, and I began to build a book of compelling slice-of-life stories about our friends and neighbors who met Alzheimer's up close and personal.
These were the stories of caregivers' unconditional love and the courage of those diagnosed with the disease.
Sandy Jaffe, the owner of BookSource and an Alzheimer's advocate I met at the Alzheimer's Forum in Washington, D.C., offered his expertise.
He became my hero in this story.
He hired a cover designer, found a distributor, and a printer.
He called in favors and the book was published at no personal cost for me or the Alzheimer's Association.
Proceeds would be pure profit.
Before long, we sold the first 1,000 copies and began the process for the second printing.
Just when I thought the books were about all gone, Sandy found some in his warehouse and sent them to me.
So, luckily, I have plenty of books to fill any orders the ad might generate.
By the way, if you don't get the Rural Missouri and would like to order a copy of Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love: The 110,000 Missourians with Alzheimer's the information is on my Website at www.lsfisher.com, or you can send $10 + $2.50 shipping to me at PO Box 1746, Sedalia MO 65302.
Please make your checks payable to Alzheimer's Association.
Maybe the blast-from-the-past ad will bring in some funds for the Alzheimer's Association to help them further their mission.
As we leave the past behind and move on to a New Year, let's each of us resolve to do our part to make this a better world for those who have dementia.
How can you join the fight against Alzheimer's?
Lace up your shoes and participate in a Walk to End Alzheimer's next fall, visit a loved one with the disease, help a caregiver, write your senators and representatives about Alzheimer's research funding, or make a donation to your local Alzheimer's Chapter.
If each of us takes one small step, we can circle the globe with love for those with the disease and create hope for a world without Alzheimer's.
copyright (c) December 2013 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 22, 2013>
'Tis the season to be _______.
How would you fill in that blank?
Of course, you may have the Fa, La, La, La song to convince you the word has to be "jolly." The problem with Christmas and Jolly are they don't always go together.
By its very nature, Christmas is a time of nostalgia, and folks, I'm here to tell you that nostalgia can be a dangerous, depressing emotion.
If you have happy memories, you are sad because the past was happier than the present.
If you have sad memories, you can become downhearted from thinking about it.
It's easily a lose, lose situation.
It's also the season for stress on steroids.
People are stressed about everything during the holidays second guessing themselves.
Did I spend too much?
Did I spend too little?
Did I buy the right size?
Will he hate it?
OMG, hope she put a gift receipt in here so I can take this back.
And how many times have I pulled out the wrapping paper, scissors, bows, ribbons, and ho-ho-ho not a piece of tape in the house.
Maybe I could hold this sucker together with all those address labels that every charitable organization in the United States sends me.
A word from the wise--don't do it!
Don't forget all the Christmas events that may or may not be cancelled.
The weather is always dicey this time of year.
The Christmas parade was tossed forward from week to week until we ran out of weeks.
I remember the years I worked on Christmas floats for Alzheimer's and then later for my women's group.
It seems that I've always been fortunate enough to work in an unheated miserably cold building.
I can't even imagine the frustration of going through all that work just to have the weather throw a hissy fit every weekend in December.
Nothing says holiday season like hazardous roadways.
Throw in a little freezing rain and a half foot of snow and it is a fool's errand to rush around trying to buy those last minute presents.
Then, I can't help but ask myself--did I, or did I not, buy something at Target when I was in there a few weeks ago?
I hardly ever shop at Target, but there I was...just at the perfect time for the credit/debit card bandits to strike.
It's really a lot easier to enjoy Christmas when you reduce the pressure.
I've tried to get my shopping list pared down to the bare bones.
Just buying for the sake of buying isn't my idea of fun.
And those long lines snaking around the buildings while the wind chill is 40 below...no way!
On Thanksgiving Day, no less.
Black Friday was seriously anti-climatic after all the stores decided to skip being thankful for pushing the bargains.
That darn Christmas stuff was out before Halloween.
I wouldn't be surprised if the Labor Day sales next year are the beginning of the Christmas Shopping Season.
Why not just move it up to Independence Day?
Firecrackers and tinsel.
They do kind of go together, don't you think?
Don't get me wrong.
I'm not down on Christmas; it just doesn't always seem to be the magical time of year for me.
Oh, I enjoy Christmas lights and Christmas carols just as much as the next person.
I've become a Hallmark Christmas Movie addict.
The thing I love most is having my family over for our annual Christmas get-together.
It's a laid back, no pressure, big pot of chili good time.
The reason I enjoy Christmas is because I have no expectations, I refuse to wax nostalgic, and I celebrate it without fanfare.
The one thing I don't care about is all that pressure to be, you guessed it, jolly.
I'll be happy because I choose to hold that emotion in my heart whether it's Christmas or any of the other 364 days of the year.
I'm a happy person.
Jolly?
Not so much.
copyright (c) December 2013 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 16, 2013>
Some people embrace change while others participate after they're pulled into it kicking and screaming.
I'm not sure that I fit totally into either category; I just know that the only thing that stays the same is that everything changes.
Okay, so I may have borrowed that expression from a country song, but darn it, I'm sure I'd have thought of it eventually.
My life is about to change dramatically.
After thirty-three years of driving to Central Missouri Electric each day to report to work, I'm embarking on that long-sought-after, scary, wildly dramatic change called "retirement." It's what I've worked and saved for throughout my career.
Most of my waking hours have been spent inside the doors of that building sitting in front of a computer monitor.
Some days were more challenging that others, but my work career was one filled with learning new skills.
I've done everything from data entry to management and had a rare opportunity to see the Coop move from a manual system into the world of computers.
Our computer programs were on an IBM System 34 and did not have such luxuries as word processing.
Before we had PC's in the office, I typed the board minutes on a typewriter, and suffered through the frustration of having to retype an entire page if I left out a word.
I'll admit, I hated to give up the Smart System for Word Perfect, then later to "downgrade" to Word.
After seeing those gigantic columnar ledgers that Ann Richards and Grace Arbuckle used, it gave me a much greater respect for spreadsheets.
I saw a lot of changes during my years at the Coop, and in retrospect, I'll admit that most of them were for the better.
Changes in my job kept it from ever becoming stale or boring.
Even the people changed.
I went from being the newbie, the first office employee to be hired in seven years, to being the person who had worked at the Coop the longest.
That means I was working with a different set of people than those who were there when I first began.
There wasn't a lot of turnover and most of us worked together for several years.
Co-workers became family--some are like brothers and sisters, others are like crazy aunts or uncles, or distant cousins.
Just like family, you learn their quirks and learn to accept that as a part of the person, or better yet find humor in individual personalities.
At the employee/Christmas dinner, Kathy Page said I was getting ready to start a new chapter.
For an avid reader and dedicated writer, that's the perfect description for how I feel about retirement--a new chapter in a good book--one that keeps me turning the pages.
It's a book I don't want to put down, I find it intriguing, mysterious, suspenseful and I keep flipping pages wanting to know what's going to happen yet.
My mind is rife with anticipation, excitement, and plans for what will happen next.
My life's book is filled with rich characters who move in and out of the pages, imprinting their images on my heart, filling my days with love and laughter.
Just like a good book, my life has been a quest, and a journey, into the unknown to conquer all kinds of evil and overcome failures.
Like all good stories, the protagonist in my story (me) is flawed, makes mistakes, passes up opportunities, often misses the mark, but still manages to overcome those itty bitty character flaws to be triumphant in a small way.
Is this going to be a new chapter, or an entirely new book?
It seems that retirement is in a way a happy conclusion to one book, and time to begin a new one.
Oh, sure it's going to be a series with many of the same characters, but a new set of adventures.
Keep reading, because this new book promises to take a few strange twists and pack some surprises along the way.
Copyright (c) 2013 by L. S. Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 8, 2013>
When we hold a newborn baby in our arms, we look into his or her eyes and wonder what kind of life is ahead for this new being.
Our job as parents is to protect our children and keep them from harm.
We shower them with love and envision how their future can reach greater heights than we ever did.
We worry about the little things--stomach aches that make the baby uncomfortable and makes him cry.
We may worry about childhood diseases and make appointments for immunizations.
Unless a family has a serious inherited genetic disease, most parents don't worry about what diseases their newborn might face later in life.
Now, a new study may add to the list of new parental worries.
Researchers have been looking for Alzheimer's in the most unlikely place--in the brains of infants.
The tests on 62 infants aged 2-22 months began with a DNA test to determine which ones had the gene variant APOE-E4, a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease.
Sixty of the infants had the gene variant.
MRI scans were used to measure activity in the infants' brains to compare the infants without the variation to the ones with it.
Oddly enough, differences were observed in the brain scans of the infants.
The infants with the APOE-E4 variant had  an increased brain growth in the frontal part of the brain with less growth in the middle and back parts of the brain.
This is similar to the brain activity in adults who have Alzheimer's disease.
The type and number of copies a person has of the APOE (apolipoprotein E) allele is associated with the risk of developing late-onset Alzheimer's.
The APOE gene has several functions, including carrying blood cholesterol through the body.
APOE is found in neurons and brain cells in healthy brains and in plaques in the Alzheimer's brain.
Three common alleles are E2, E3, and E4.
E2 is thought to protect from Alzheimer's, E3 (the most common) is thought to be neutral, and E4 is linked to an increased risk of Alzheimer's.
People with two E4 alleles, have a greater risk of developing Alzheimer's, but may not develop the disease, just as people without any of the E4 variant may develop the disease.
The good news is that although these infants have the APOE-E4 variant, it doesn't mean they will grow up to develop Alzheimer's late in life.
Even better, the infants with the variant didn't show any developmental delays.
The study was intended to increase understanding of how the gene influences brain development.
Sean Deoni, Brown University's Advanced Baby Imaging Lab, said, "These results do not establish a direct link to the changes seen in Alzheimer's patients, but with more research they may tell us something about how the gene contributes to Alzheimer's risk later in life." The studies on infants is interesting and may be a piece of the puzzle when it comes to figuring out the genetic influence on Alzheimer's.
Just like any disease influenced by genetics, environment may be the key to provide an override of the gene pool and remaining healthy.
Research shows that physical activity and good nutrition with healthy food choices can reduce the risk of Alzheimer's disease.
Social interactions, puzzles and brain teasers are ways to keep your brain active.
Our children complete the circle of life.
We hope they inherit our good traits and healthy genes and the risk-carrying genes are allowed to sink into infinity.
When we rock the cradle, we need to worry less about genetic predispositions and concentrate on raising our children in a healthy environment.
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher, December 2013 Http://earlyonset.blogspot.com  
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 29, 2013>
It exploded like a bomb, shook like an earthquake, sounded like a tornado, looked like a wildfire, felt like the end of the world.
Still from Jason Knox Video I was having trouble sleeping so I was lying in bed reading a book.
I heard an explosion and my windows rattled.
If it had stopped there, I would have been fine.
Instead, the house shook and shook.
I jumped up out of bed and ran through the house while I tried to figure out what was going on.
The way the house was shaking, I thought maybe it was an earthquake.
A loud roar sounded more like a tornado, but I had come home at 9:00 p.m. and knew the sky was clear.
I had stopped for a moment on the walkway to breathe in the fresh night and look at the stars.
What could it be?
The noise sounded like the entire fleet of Stealth bombers from Whitman circling my house.
Had it been a bomb?
Had a plane crashed?
My heart pounded as I tried to figure out what was going on.
The house continued to shake and the rumble was not fading.
I called my son and asked him if he knew what was happening.
While I was on the phone with him, I looked out my French doors and the entire sky was lit on the west side of my house.
Could a meteor have hit close by?
It felt like the end of the world.
"Why don't you just come over here?"
Eric asked.
He could see the fireball, but it was farther away.
I ran outside, carrying my phone and I could see flames leaping toward the sky.
The sound was even louder.
My brother-in-law was in the yard, and like me, he had no idea what we were seeing.
"I'm getting out of here," I said to my brother-in-law.
I didn't know what it was, just that it was close, and a roaring, rumbling fire was consuming the night.
I jumped in my car and headed away from the explosion.
I met car after car rushing toward it.
I didn't understand their thinking since no one knew what it was and whether it would explode again.
I just knew that distance seemed safer to me.
Eric called back and told me it was a pipeline explosion.
Of all the scenarios that had raced through my head, I never once thought of a pipeline explosion.
I drove on since I didn't feel confident that it was going to stop with one big blast.
I watched from a distance and for the first time thought to snap a picture on my cell phone.
The people rushing toward the explosion, or those with good cameras, captured the flames towering toward the heavens.
My lone picture is not that impressive.
Thankfully, no one was hurt since the explosion was in a field.
The explosion was felt thirty or more miles away.
It was about seven miles from where I live.
By three o'clock the sky darkened again, and I headed back home.
Soon, the night settled back into a peaceful November evening, and my heart rate returned to normal.
The view from my French doors today is still the calm wooded area it was yesterday.
For that, I am most thankful.
copyright (c) November 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com     
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 26, 2013>
 November is a time for self-examination and giving thought to our many blessings and giving thanks where thanks are due.
Many of my Facebook friends have been posting one thing they are thankful for each day this month.
I've never participated in this delightful idea, but felt compelled to complete my monthly list in one fell swoop.
I made the list and entered it into One Note on a sleepless night.
After reviewing the list, I realized that I don't remember seeing any of these items on their lists.
I always suspected my thought processes might not be the same as the average person, but until now, I've kept some of the weirdness under wraps.
I am thankful for... Mice.
It's easy to think  of mice as pesky rodents with no purpose in life other than leaving  droppings behind furniture and chewing up important papers.
But mice  are extremely important when it comes to medical research in general  and Alzheimer's research in particular.
Sleepless nights.
On  sleepless nights, my brain goes into creative overdrive.
My best  ideas come to me in the middle of the night.
Wishes that didn't come true.
Throughout my lifetime, I've made a lot of goofy wishes, and I'm  so thankful that they didn't come true.
I don't think the life  of a fairy princess, a rock star, superhero or being married to Paul  McCartney is what God had in mind for me.
People who hurt my feelings  when I was young.
Yep, all those cruel kids made me into a  rhino-hide adult.
It is almost impossible to hurt my feelings,  because frankly I don't give a poop about what insensitive, rude  people say to me.
Failure.
I've learned  more from my failures than I ever learned from my successes.
Let's  face it, when I make really bad mistakes, I try hard to not do it  again.
Not being beautiful.
Being  beautiful is a burden I wouldn't want to carry.
Besides, I had to  work a lot harder on my personality.
Hard times.
There have been  times in my life when it was a challenge to figure out how to pay  the bills, feed the kids, and not have too much month left at the  end of the money.
Because of  hard times, I've never had that fear  of being poor that some people have.
Been there, survived, and know  that happiness isn't based on the size of my bank account.
Hard work.
Without years of  hard work, I wouldn't have done as well in my job as I did and  wouldn't be looking forward to retirement.
Having my heart broken.
If  a few boys hadn't broken my heart when I was younger, my life  would have turned out differently.
I'm happy with the way it  turned out, so thank you for breaking my heart and forcing me to  move on.
Rainy, gloomy days.
When  the rain falls and the sun is elusive, it is a perfect time to sleep  in and laze around reading a book.
Boredom.
My life is so  hectic that if I find time to be bored, I can relax...or think of  something totally fun to do.
Hunger.
When I'm hungry,  I know I haven't overeaten.
Paying bills.
When I pay  bills, it means I have another month of electricity, internet, phone  service, and a zero balance on my credit cards.
Not winning the lottery.
I've always known that winning the lottery would screw up my life,  and I like it the way it is.
Flies and spiders.
When I'm  in a murderous rage, I can squash a spider or swat a fly and not  suffer an ounce of guilt.
Clear packing tape and plastic  wrap.
The way these two stick to themselves and trying to figure  out how to get a roll started teaches me patience.
Old age.
Without old age,  I'd have to pay to get into ballgames and wouldn't get senior  discounts.
People who don't like me.
They teach me to stand up for myself.
People who take advantage of  me.
They keep me on my toes and help me say "no." Running late.
It's  amazing how much time I'd waste waiting if I got to everything  early.
Besides, I've avoided traffic tickets and dangerous driving  when I decided it was better late than never.
Anger.
If an injustice  makes me angry, it means I am passionate enough to care.
Fear.
I might not be alive  today if I didn't have sense enough to be afraid from time to  time.
Ignorance.
Since I clearly  don't know everything, ignorance means I always have something to  learn.
Grumpy old men.
Without  them, grumpy old women wouldn't have anyone to argue with.
Lousy TV shows.
When a  lousy show is on TV, it is much easier for me to turn it off and do  something productive.
Bratty kids.
I'm so  thankful that none of those bratty kids belong to me.
Runny nose.
Without a runny  nose, I'm sure my head would explode from the inside out when I  have a head cold and infected sinuses.
Thunderstorms and lightning.
We need the rain to replenish the earth and the lightning keeps me  honest since I don't want to be struck down for telling a lie.
Bad lab results.
Without  bad lab results, I wouldn't have incentive to work toward being  healthier.
I would have continued the same bad dietary habits with  the same results.
Uncertainty.
I don't know  everything that is going to happen in my future!
Uncertainty keeps  me optimistic that the best is going to happen and not the worst.
One of the great things about making a list like this is that it made me realize the thing I am most grateful for is living the life I want and wanting the life I live.
I am happy to be me and I don't envy anybody else's life or want to be somebody I'm not.
Seriously, I am thankful for everyone who is voting each day for Early Onset Alzheimer's blog at http://www.healthline.com/health/best-health-blogs-contest.
If you enjoy reading my blog, won't you please vote once a day until January 20, 2014?
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher November 2013 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 22, 2013>
My six-year-old grandson seriously asked me one morning, "Grandma Linda, have you ever time-traveled?" I don't believe anyone had ever asked me that question before, but it really got me to thinking about time travel.
I remember the first time I read H. G. Wells' The Time Machine  and saw the original movie.
The Time Traveler observes that time travel is a fourth dimension and "only another way of looking at Time."  Then, of course, time travel was common on Star Trek.
I remember one episode when Captain Kirk and the crew from the Enterprise went back in time to find themselves in a gunfight against the Earp brothers at the O.K.
Corral.
They survived when Mr. Spock realized that the time travel was an illusion in their minds.
We travel to the past in our dreams and in sudden flashes of remembrance.
Travel to the future can be through daydreams, plans, goals, or intuition.
Some claim to see the future in a crystal ball, but I've never had that advantage.
Jim's grandma used to see the future in coffee grounds...guess that's a version of reading tea leaves.
That her coffee had grounds in the bottom is an indication of how strong it was.
I was always afraid to have her read my coffee grounds because she once told a neighbor that her daughter would "come home in a box." And she did after a car wreck.
Anniversaries are a time that make people time travel.
Whether it is a personal anniversary or historical anniversary, dates can trigger realistic memory travel.
With the fiftieth anniversary of President Kennedy's assassination,  I've about overloaded on specials about the shooting in Dallas and the mysteries that linger.
Today as a nation, many will collectively time travel to November 22, 1963.
We will think about where we were and what we were doing when we heard about the assassination.
I heard the news in the hallway at school.
We sat on the floor listening to the radio as the tragedy unfolded.
I was telling my granddaughter a few weeks ago that we were out of school and at home watching TV when Jack Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald.
Before dementia, Jim was a much more effective time traveler than I will ever be.
He remembered people, places, and dates from his childhood with more clarity than I could remember the previous week.
One of the cruelties of dementia is how it erases memories.
In the earlier stages, long-term memory isn't affected as much as short-term memory, and it seems the person with dementia has effectively time traveled and, in fact, seems to be living in a different time.
Once an elderly lady who was in the nursing home with Jim told me that she had to get home because her dad would be really mad that she was out after dark.
Alzheimer's is like entering a time machine that zooms into the past, wiping out the present and future.
Eventually, plaques and tangles jam up the moving parts and the fabulous time machine malfunctions leaving the traveler stranded.
So, the answer is "yes." I do time travel.
I don't need a machine with whirling dials that I have to enter to travel back and forth in time.
Any little nanosecond will do.
All I have to do is rev up the fabulous time machine located between my ears to retrieve another place and time.
As far as the future, those travels are flashes of "coming attractions" found in the realm of imagination.
Yes, I still look forward to the future and would rather travel forward than backward any day.
The mind is the real time machine, and it really is just another way of looking at time.
Copyright (c) November 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 17, 2013>
In 1983 President Ronald Reagan declared November Alzheimer's Awareness Month.
This year as we mark the 30th anniversary of this event, we have seen both hope and despair on the road to finding effective treatment for a disease that affects over five million Americans.
When President Reagan launched the national campaign to bring an end to a debilitating, fatal disease, he most likely never imagined that he would personally become a victim of Alzheimer's.
I know that Jim and I never suspected that this disease would cast its ugly net over our lives.
To be aware of Alzheimer's, you need to take more than a casual glance at the disease.
It is not a joke about forgetfulness that afflicts the elderly creating humorous moments of cute memory lapses.
Memory  is only part of the disease and often the first symptom that others notice.
Alzheimer's is a brain disease.
Beta amyloid plaques build up between nerve cells creating sticky clumps that damage the brain's cells ability to communicate with each other.
As if this wasn't enough problems, tau tangles interfere with the movement of nutrients from food molecules and other key materials in the brain.
Without these essential nutrients, brain cells die.
All this brain chaos, follows a predictable pattern in a brain diseased with Alzheimer's.
This progression can take up to twenty years!
At first, the disease doesn't seem too bad.
During the early stages the person with dementia has memory problems and issues with thinking and planning.
When Jim was in the early stages, many people could not see the differences in him that I could.
These changes were subtle.
One weekend we went to Manhattan, Kansas, to visit my son.
We were going to drive downtown to get a pizza.
As we drove down the street, I spotted Pizza Hut.
"Turn left," I told him.
"Which way?" he asked.
That's when I realized that he couldn't tell left from right--at least not when it was spoken.
I learned to point to the right or left.
Also, in the early stages, Jim developed aphasia.
He was a voracious reader, but began to buy multiple copies of the same book because he couldn't follow the story line and didn't remember reading it a few weeks earlier.
Eventually, Jim progressed to a moderate or middle stage of the disease where his symptoms became more pronounced.
His appearance changed a little as he moved into what I considered to be a more eccentric stage.
He wore his denim jacket year round and decorated it with pins and the Veterans Week name tag from Branson.
He wore dark sunglasses and used a cane.
He just looked different and began to act more childlike.
Jim was docile and agreeable--neither of which were normal traits for him.
He became more silent, his speech hesitant.
Jim had been a talented musician and could play any instrument with strings, and knew hundreds of songs.
Eventually, he could barely play and could  remember only a few songs and often repeated the same line many times.
Reality set in for me during the middle stage.
Caregiving became a real challenge and I worried about Jim's safety.
He began to wander and managed to get away from me, other family and hired caregivers.
We were fortunate and found him each time, but only after heart-stopping moments.
In severe dementia, most of the brain is seriously damaged and begins to shrink.
Eventually, we placed Jim in long-term care.
At first he paced constantly, and seemed unaware of most people around him.
He  stopped talking except for a few words.
He had to have assistance with the most basic functions of life.
Over time, he began to lose his balance and had to use a Merry Walker, and later a wheelchair, in order to remain mobile.
He went through "failures to thrive" when he became gaunt and hollow-eyed.
Jim had dementia for ten years and from the beginning to the end, we did what we could to keep him physically healthy and happy.
Some days, it felt like a losing battle, but it was always worth it.
So, during this Alzheimer's Awareness month, I hope that awareness is as close as you get to the disease.
I don't believe anyone who hasn't seen Alzheimer's in a loved one can truly understand the all consuming nature of the disease.
I know that I never had a clue about the reality of a disease that erodes  lives and steals a loved one away one memory, one skill at a time.
It is because of Jim that I understand the need to find effective treatment and a cure for this incurable life-stealing disease.
Congress passed on a unanimous basis the National Alzheimer's Project Act which created the first National Alzheimer's Plan.
The plan is a strategy to fight Alzheimer's and it is crucial that the proposed additional $100 million funding is included in fiscal year 2014 through the appropriations process.
Missouri Senator Roy Blunt is one of twenty-nine members of Congress appointed to a bipartisan budget committee to report budgets by December 13.
I urge my fellow Missourians to ask Senator Blunt to remember Alzheimer's and support the National Plan to Address Alzheimer's Disease.
Copyright (c) November 2013 by L.S.
Fisher earlyonset.blogspot.com     
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 4, 2013>
You always know it is autumn at my house when the ground is littered with walnuts.
Even with a handy-dandy walnut picker-upper, they seem to carpet the yard and overflow onto the walkway.
Colorful trees and flying leaves leave no doubt as to the season.
I left up Halloween decorations while I readied my house for company.
My sister-in-law Sissy and brother-in-law Jim had sold out and were headed to Oregon to live near their children.
My nieces, Brenda and Sherry, have spent the past weeks helping and they were all flying back together.
The plan was for them to spend the night and I would take them to the airport hotel Sunday.
Saturday, they arrived from two different places.
Not sure how many were going to be here, I cooked a scary big pot of chili and had deli meats for sandwiches.
As people began to arrive, I made pot after pot of coffee.
Soon my house was wall-to-wall people.
Just like the old days.
The house filled with laughter as we visited.
"You know who would have really loved this?" I asked as family gathered in the kitchen.
"Jim.
He loved spending time with family.
Sometimes he would come home and say, 'Oh, by the way, we're having a jam session--and I invited everyone to dinner.' Of course, he'd have no idea just how many were coming." My niece, Sherry, had her video camera going, just like Jim used to.
It reminded me of the two of them talking about their multitude of family tapes.
"We'll have the history, Uncle Jimmy.
Everyone else will forget, but we can watch our videos and remember." She was correct.
So many slices of life would be forgotten without video.
Sherry and I walked out into the yard to reminisce.
"We want to reminisce too," chimed in my granddaughter and great-niece.
"You're not old enough to reminisce," I said.
"I'm half of sixteen," my great-niece said.
The two girls seemed to be joined at the hip.
They entertained with dance routines and songs, advertised with posters announcing various show times.
They stood on the porch steps, facing the flag, hand over hearts and sang the National Anthem.
My six-year-old grandson stood at attention and saluted the flag.
The scene was amazing and touching, especially considering the flag they used was my autumn "Welcome" flag, with pumpkins on it.
In their eyes, it was as valid as the stars and stripes as they sang the song without missing a word.
Sissy and I sat at the table watching the commotion going on outside with four-wheelers, interactions between cousins, older and younger.
"You can sit right here and be entertained," she said.
"It's like watching a reality show, isn't it?"  I agreed.
Saturday evening, Sherry and Brenda went to a Halloween party with my son, Rob, and daughter-in-law, Stacey.
They came in laughing and joking at midnight.
One of the highlights was Brenda winning the costume contest, without a costume.
Of course, it helped that Rob was the judge.
He said she was dressed exactly like his cousin Brenda from Oregon.
Sunday morning the time change helped us all get up earlier than we thought possible.
After coffee, we fixed a big breakfast--biscuits, gravy, sausage, eggs--and then Rob and Stacey tackled how to fit all the Oregon bound family's luggage into the trunk of my car.
Amazingly enough, it all fit except a small overnight case.
Early afternoon, we loaded into the car for the drive to the Airport Hilton.
We stopped by North  Kansas City Hospital so Sissy could visit her sister who had been admitted a few days earlier.
Then I took them to the hotel.
Sherry checked them in and Sissy sat in one of the big comfy couches in the lobby.
Jim and Brenda were loading luggage onto a cart.
When they opened the trunk, I was impressed by the neat arrangement of luggage.
There was not an inch of wasted space!
I hugged everyone, determined to keep it light and happy.
"I'll be seeing you," I said.
I jumped in my car and drove across the parking lot and stopped to have Onstar plug in the directions home.
As I sat there, I thought of Scotts Mills, Silver Falls, Crooked Finger, the scent of pine on a breezy mountain.
Thought of Jim and how he loved Oregon and visiting his childhood places.
But I didn't cry.
I just smiled and whispered a prayer for happy trails until we meet again.
Copyright (c) by L.S.
Fisher November 2013 www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 22, 2013>
We've all heard how important sleep is to our health.
Now, a new study published in JAMA Neurology indicates that a lack of sleep might increase our chances of developing Alzheimer's.
Or, is it the other way around?
Does Alzheimer's lead to a lack of sleep?
Jim always considered sleep "a waste of time." He was an early riser his entire life.
I, on the other hand, could barely function without eight hours sleep.
Once Jim developed dementia, he seemed to require only about four hours sleep.
Over time, I too shortened my sleeping hours.
Between Jim and being at work by seven o'clock, I just flat didn't have time to sleep much.
My eight hours dwindled to six or less.
I knew it wasn't good for my health, but chronic lack of sleep became the norm.
A common New Year's resolution for me was to get more sleep.
I've struggled with health problems that may have gone away completely with enough shut-eye.
One of the side effects of sleep deprivation is weight gain.
In some ways that seems counter-intuitive.
At one time I figured the longer I was awake, the more calories I would burn and that would make it easier to lose weight.
Wrong.
It takes sleep to regulate the hormones that tell us when we are hungry.
When ghrelin and leptin are not balanced, we think we are hungry which leads to overeating.
Instead of sleep being a waste of time, we are at our most productive while we are catching our ZZZ's.
When we move into the deepest stage of sleep, our bodies move into restorative overdrive.
While we sleep, we are recharging our energy levels.
Our muscles relax and our blood pressure drops.
Hormones essential for tissue growth and repair are released.
During sleep, we consolidate everything we've learned which improves our memory.
On the flip side of the sleep coin, lack of sleep quality or quantity may lead to serious health disorders--heart disease, stroke, diabetes--to name a few.
A couple of other distressing side effects are depression and premature aging.
Researchers have known for years that people who don't get enough sleep are forgetful.
This new study takes that concern to an entirely different level.
Researchers at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore used scans to measure the buildup of beta-amyloid plaques, one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease.
Even healthy people can have some plaques in their brains, but they do not have as many as people with Alzheimer's.
The people who did not get enough sleep had more buildup of plaques in their brains than those who reported that they slept well at night.
Why would sleep have anything to do with beta-amyloid plaques?
It seems that while we sleep our brain is in self-cleaning mode.
During sleep our brain cells shrink which allows cerebrospinal fluid to wash away the toxins in our brain.
Of course, this all comes with a disclaimer that sleep might not stop Alzheimer's, but anything that will reduce the formation of cell-choking plaques can be seen as therapeutic.
In addition to sleep itself, the researchers believe that drugs should be explored to force the cleansing process that can occur naturally during deep sleep.
This study just reinforces the need to explore different avenues of treatment for Alzheimer's.
Could our way of life contribute to an unprecedented increase of Alzheimer's disease, cancer, and heart disease?
Research shows that healthy eating, exercise, and a good night's sleep work together to prevent a myriad of diseases.
As if daytime isn't enough time to ruin our health, we use evenings to cram in TV, Facebook,    volunteer work, meetings, social activities, or heaven forbid we take work home.
So much to do, so little time.
Then when we fall into bed, our brains are still going full tilt to remind us of what we still have to do, or what we've forgotten to do.
Sweet dreams are a long time coming just to be interrupted by the alarm clock letting us know it's time to get up and do it all over again.
Maybe it's time to take a deep breath, spend some quality time relaxing and catch some extra ZZZ's.
Sweet dreams may be the answer to some of life's most perplexing health issues.
Copyright (c) October 2013 by Linda Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com   
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 14, 2013>
After hearing about the expensive tests for Alzheimer's, researchers came up with a cheap screening test.
The really amazing thing about this test is you may already have the necessary item in your pantry--a jar of peanut butter.
Known as the brief olfactory test, taking a whiff of Jif, or any peanut butter for that matter, can help a researcher determine if you have Alzheimer's.
Anyway, that was the news out of the University of Florida.
It's commonly known that Alzheimer's affects the sense of smell.
Other studies have been done on the olfactory system and Alzheimer's disease.
This is not the first!
According to a 1989 study published in the International Journal of Neuroscience,  researchers believed that the changes occurring in Alzheimer's starts in the cortical region of the brain, the region that controls our sense of smell.
In 2010, the Alzheimer's Association and the National Institutes of health funded a study that showed that Alzheimer's mice could not distinguish odors as well as other mice.
At that time, the researchers noted that an olfactory test could be an inexpensive way to diagnose Alzheimer's.
Fast forward to 2013 and we have the peanut butter whiff test.
Jennifer Stamps, a graduate student at the University of Florida's McKnight Brain Institute, conducted the test on  ninety people.
Some of the people had Alzheimer's or other types of dementia and others had mild congnitive impairment (MCI).
Although researchers did not know which people had which problem when they conducted the tests, they were surprised to find that the Alzheimer's patients reacted to the sniff test differently than the other groups.
Here's how the test was conducted: A tablespoon of peanut butter was put on a metric ruler and one nostril was checked at a time.
Eighteen of the study group had early-stage Alzheimer's, and they all had one thing in common--trouble smelling the peanut butter out of their left nostril.
The group with other types of dementia did not have this problem.
The results of the twenty-four people with MCI was mixed--ten had trouble with the left nostril but fourteen didn't.
Is this an indication that the ten will go on to develop Alzheimer's disease?
Time will tell.
Other researchers urge caution due to the small number of cases included in this study.
Others note that head trauma, sinus problems, or congestion can affect the results of an olfactory test.
In fact, my friend Donna can't smell anything after an accident that happened when she was a teenager.
So, are you tempted to grab a jar of peanut butter and sniff away?
Being the curious person I am and having seen the devastating effects of dementia, I did exactly that.
Right nostril, a-okay!
One down, one to go.
Second nostril--nothing, nada, zip, zero.
Oh, I did not like this test.
Not one little bit.
Time to analyze the test results.
Let's see.
Left nostril.
Come to think of it, I just came off a ten day supply of antibiotics for a left ear infection.
So I'm sure that could have affected my sense of smell in my left nostril.
Anyway that's my story and I'm sticking to it.
The peanut butter test should come with a disclaimer: Don't try this at home.
Copyright (c) October 2013 by L.S.
Fisher Earlyonset.blogspot.com  
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 30, 2013>
When a day is done, whether good or bad, it immediately becomes history.
One of the things about history is that you can't go back and change it; nor can you go back and relive it.
As far as history goes, we all learn important dates in school.
In fact we learn more dates than we can ever remember.
Sometimes our teachers help us devise tricks to remember and with a little rhyme, we might always remember a date.
"In fourteen hundred ninety-two, Columbus sailed the ocean blue." How could I ever forget that date?
That's history class.
I always enjoyed history, outside of the date thingy.
History is stories...important stories...about events that shape us now, although most school kids think history is boring.
The reason it is boring to kids is because the rich stories of the past are reduced to facts and dates, and some of those are presented in a biased and controversial manner.
It is interesting to hear that sometimes important events are skipped in the history that children are taught today.
Each of us has a personal history with dates that stick in our minds to be re-examined annually.
We have birth dates, death dates, anniversaries, graduations, and a myriad of other events not only to mark time, but also to remember.
Is it any wonder that with all these dates stuck in our heads, buried deep inside our brains, that we sometimes forget an appointment or a loved one's birthday?
Today's date takes me back to a day twenty-three years ago when I saw my dad leave this world.
It was on the anniversary of his own dad's death.
I called my mom tonight and we talked about a lot of things before she brought up the date.
I knew it was on our minds from the first "hello." Our brains are so complex that we can't even comprehend all that goes on between our ears.
I can't visualize how many a billion is whether I'm talking about dollars or nerve cells in my brain.
Understanding my brain would be a lot like understanding how I can write words on a keyboard and have this computer take those words and allow me to put them on the Internet where anyone can read them.
Perhaps, as perplexing is to comprehend how anyone can totally understands how that process actually works.
Historical facts we learned, and our own personal history, is stored in our brains.
We have much more stored in our brains than we can ever retrieve.
If you are like me, you know it's there, but can't retrieve it at the moment you want it.
For instance, if you are playing a game of Trivial Pursuit and you know the answer, but can't remember what it is until immediately after the time is up.
Worse yet, you need to know an important piece of information and instead of remembering it at the crucial time, you remember it in the middle of the night.
Memory and history are two parts of the same thing.
When two people share a history, and Alzheimer's subtracts that connection, it is a loss for both.
Our page in history is our life story, and we want that story to be action packed, suspenseful, and with a glorious ending.
With personal history, the dates are not nearly as important as the stories.
The only test in life, is a test of self.
Copyright (c) September 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 21, 2013>
Earlier this week, Dr. Francis Collins, director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) fulfilled his promise to Alzheimer's advocates to designate $40 million from his 2013 budget for Alzheimer's research.
I was one of more than 700 advocates at the Alzheimer's Association Advocacy Forum, where Dr. Collins made the announcement that he was taking this unique step to show the NIH's commitment to finding a cure for a disease that has baffled scientists for decades.
During his keynote address on April 23 at the forum, Dr. Collins said, "I so wish it could be more, but I hope you hear in this kind of a commitment the way in which we at NIH see this as an opportunity and responsibility.
We also hope that moving forward we can put medical research back on the stable track that is needed in order to support the research and the researchers." The story in last week's New York Times and USA Today both report that an additional $5 million has been designated by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) to provide support for innovative clinical trials.
Among the trials being supported through these additional funds is the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer's Network Trials Unit (DIAN-TU) trial at Washington University, St. Louis.
Dr. Randy Bateman is the team leader.
I met Dr. Bateman several years ago when he accompanied Missouri advocates on our visits with our legislators at the Alzheimer's Forum in Washington, D.C.
Hearing firsthand the possibilities of research to find therapies or a cure for early onset Alzheimer's is encouraging in a way that reading about it cannot touch.
Dr. Bateman is passionate about his work, confident, and optimistic that a cure can be found for the hereditary form of Alzheimer's that can strike during early adulthood.
The APOE4 trials being conducted by Drs.
Eric Reiman and Pierre Tariot at the Banner Alzheimer's Institute in Phoenix will be fully funded in 2013.
Several other trials are being funded to move them forward.
An Allopregnaolone Regenerative Therapeutic study at the University of Southern California will evaluate the safety and  tolerance of a natural brain steroid to treat Alzheimer's disease.
Other studies will analyze data collected from volunteers to identify promising therapies, test existing drugs currently used for other conditions for effective treatment of Alzheimer's, and treatment based on targeting the immune system.
In a letter I received as an Alzheimer's Ambassador, Alzheimer's CEO Harry Johns said that the fulfillment of NIH's pledge is historic.
"In addition to fueling much needed research toward treatment, prevention, and ultimately a cure, it shows the growing recognition that our cause is receiving at the nation's highest levels." Johns praises hundreds of Ambassadors and hundreds of thousands of advocates for making the case in Washington, D.C., and in communities nationwide.
In the Alzheimer's Association news release, Johns said, "These studies are examples of the quality research in the pipeline that needs further funding in order to prevent and effectively treat Alzheimer's disease by 2025 as outlined in the National Alzheimer's Plan." Kudos to NIH and NIA for taking this first step toward prioritizing research for Alzheimer's.
Now, we need to keep pressing our legislators to take a proactive approach to finding a cure for this disease.
Alzheimer's is an equal opportunity disease.
It affects people without regard to race, religion, financial status, political party, intelligence, education, or any other classification you can think of.
No human is immune to Alzheimer's.
It could happen to you or to someone you love if it hasn't already.
It's not a question of whether we can afford the research for Alzheimer's, the real question is--can we afford not to fund research?
Does it make sense to spend only $484 million on research that costs this country more than $140 billion annually in Medicare and Medicaid?
Alzheimer's is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States, yet the funding is minuscule when compared to research spent on other diseases which received billions annually to fund research.
Some of us have spent years advocating for Alzheimer's research dollars.
It can be frustrating when funding is stagnant, or worse yet, the years funding was cut.
By hanging tough, advocates have fought for treatment equity for those living with Alzheimer's and other dementias.
This is not the time to rest on our laurels, it is the time to step up our advocacy while the focus is on research.
The ultimate goal is a world without Alzheimer's, and it can be done.
Copyright (c) September 2013 by L.S.
Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com  Resources: http://www.alz.org/documents_custom/nih_grant_announcment_final.pdf http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2013/09/18/alzheimers-disease-research-funding/2832865/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 15, 2013>
Jim wandered off many times after he developed Alzheimer's.
The first thing I learned as a caregiverwas immediate action was necessary to find him.
I can't count the number of times he disappeared.
It only took a moment of inattention, or the misconception that someone else had eyes on him.
Whether he disappeared mid-morning at a mall in Columbia, early afternoon at Silver Dollar City, late afternoon at the airport in Las Vegas, or from our home in the middle of the night, a search began immediately.
Unfortunately, wandering is a common problem for people with Alzheimer's.
Sixty percent of people with dementia will wander causing anxiety for the caregiver and creating a life threatening situation for the wanderer.
Beginning the search immediately is key to finding your loved one safely.
Statistics are on your side since ninety-four percent of the time they will be found within one and a half miles of where they disappeared.
You can take a few steps to help find your loved one.
Alert neighbors of the situation and ask them to call you if they see your loved one walking alone.
When searching, look in the direction of your loved one's dominant hand--that is the direction they will usually go.
Use Medic Alert+Alzheimer's Association Safe Return or Comfort Zone (an electronic device).
If you don't immediately locate your loved one, call 911 and report them missing.
To ensure that when you call 911, the appropriate steps are taken to activate an immediate search, legislation should be in place.
Legislation geared toward a Silver Alert should encompass all persons with dementia regardless of age.
Jim had early onset dementia and would have been too young for the Silver Alert in states that identify only persons sixty-five or older with dementia.
Missouri has an "Endangered Person Advisory" which could include anyone who may be in danger because of age, health, mental or physical disability, environment or weather conditions.
If you have a loved one with dementia, it is important to know the laws in your state and work toward legislation to make sure anyone with Alzheimer's is included regardless of age.
The law should also have provisions to activate the system based on a caregiver statement since many people wander before they have a formal diagnosis.
An important part of legislation is training for all emergency personnel.
Proper training can make all the difference in finding the person with Alzheimer's quickly using search techniques specifically tailored to persons with dementia.
The immediate emphasis should be on a search of the local area.
Quick and educated response is key to survival.
Silver Alerts are state programs designed specifically for vulnerable adults who have wandered.
The search for adults is different than those used for AMBER alerts.
AMBER alerts use statewide alerts which are not typically needed when searching for an adult wanderer.
Also, since most wandering adults, like Jim, wander repeatedly, alerting everyone statewide each time an adult wanders could cause the public to become desensitized.
This could do more harm than good by reducing the statewide response in cases where it is needed.
The goal is to find wanderers within twenty-four hours and reunite them with their families.
The longer the person with dementia is gone, the chances of finding them unharmed is correspondingly diminished.
More than 125,000 search and rescue teams are activated each year to search for missing persons with dementia.
This does not include the countless times that family members search for and find their loved ones.
Kimberly Kelly with Project Far From Home estimates that as many as three million people with dementia wander away from home each year.
We were fortunate and Jim was always found quickly by either family, friends, neighbors, and during the mall disappearance, security guards.
I was young enough to go searching for Jim, but not every vulnerable adult has a caregiver who can look for them.
A system needs to be put in place, nationwide, that will activate an immediate search for vulnerable adults with a goal to provide safe return to their homes.
Copyright (c) September 2013 by L.S.
Fisher Http://earlyonset.blogspot.com  sources: www.alz.org http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/26/wandering-alzheimers-_n_3653267.html
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 10, 2013>
We had a bright sunshiny, warm day for our 2013 Walk to End Alzheimer's at the Missouri State Fairgrounds Saturday morning.
I was there bright and early--6:30 a.m--along with other volunteers and members of the committee.
Sheila and I played traffic cops as we directed placement of tables, conferring as to whether that table might work better here or there.
For once we didn't have to worry about rain, but heat was a concern with temps expected to soar into the upper 90's.
At the last minute, while a volunteer was on his way to get more ice, we asked him to buy more water too.
Walkers began to arrive and organized chaos took over as teams began to group together.
My sister-in-law, Ginger, started the cake walk, Kim and Bobby Brown manned the raffle table (which may have helped them rest up for awhile after bringing a trailer load of tables and chairs), Sheila grabbed the microphone and began to make announcements, registration tables were manned, and on my table, I arranged books to sign and give to walkers.
As I signed, I chatted with friends and family who came up to get a copy of Focus on the Positive.
I also met new friends who came to the walk for the first time this year.
As I was signing, a woman walked up wearing a shirt that said "Hellen's Heroes." I knew she was on the team honoring Hellen Cook, the woman with dementia whose body was found after nearly a month long search.
Hellen was Darolyn's mother, and she introduced me to her brother Mike.
My heart went out to this family who lived through a caregiver's worse nightmare.
They have taken this tragedy and turned it into a positive by proposing "Hellen's Law" to tighten up reporting an endangered missing person.
I had my picture taken with member's of Hellen's Heroes and felt an instant connection with Darolyn.
Later as I was signing books, Linda Newkirk, executive director of the Greater Missouri Chapter, was explaining the significance of the pinwheel flowers and Jim's Team held our purple flowers high to show that we had lost a loved one.
Others held up orange, blue, and yellow flowers as their colors were explained.
Shortly after, Sheila came to my table and told me I needed to go up to the front where Linda was speaking.
She finally dragged me away.
When I got there, Linda was talking about Hellen Cook's family and their advocacy.
Then,Linda Newkirk, Executive Director of the Greater Missouri Chapter, announced that the chapter is placing a brick in their Garden of Hope in recognition of my volunteer work and advocacy.
I am so honored!
Even after all these years, I still feel the Chapter did more for me than I can ever do for them.
They were my lifeline for ten years while Jim and I traveled the Alzheimer's journey.
Sheila, my granddaughter, and I dropped our pinwheels into a bucket and took the lead as four hundred walkers began the walk.
Instead of finishing the walk, we stopped and cheered others on as they came down the shaded walkway.
We headed back to the Highway Gardens.
Volunteers were planting the pinwheel flowers in the Promise Garden.
The breeze turned the pinwheels and tears pricked my eyes to see the expressions of love.
I walked through the Promise Garden snapping photos and found the flower I had decorated for Jim.
The breeze continued to turn the pinwheels nearby, but it was as if Jim's flower stopped to pose for the photo.
I snapped the photo, and the pinwheel resumed spinning.
Copyright (c) September 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, September 4, 2013>
Jim Fisher Jim is the reason I walk in the Walk to End Alzheimer's.
I think I loved him from the first day we met when his Uncle Orvie introduced us outside the Dew Drop Inn in Stover.
It was by chance that Jim was in Missouri since he spent a lot of his growing up years in Oregon, Idaho, Utah, California... Jim loved to travel and we often went to Oregon to visit his relatives and childhood places.
Later, we went to Estes Park and the Rocky Mountains annually.
Jim was a talented musician who loved to play his Fender guitar and sing country songs.
I remember one time I taped him with our gigantic video camera singing "Colorado" while chipmunks and tourists stopped everything to just soak up the sunshine, clear mountain air and melody.
Jim's life was cut short when he developed dementia at forty-nine.
He passed away in 2005 after ten years living with a disease that robbed him of his talents, sense of humor, and thoughtful conversation.
Jim lives in my memory and dreams, and I know that he is not forgotten by his family and friends.
We need to stop this disease before more families go through the loss and pain of Alzheimer's disease and other dementia.
Walks are held across the country.
If you can't come to the September 7 Sedalia Walk.
Join a walk near your hometown.
Walk for Jim.
Walk for your loved ones.
Walk for more than 5 million Americans with this incurable progressive disease.
copyright (c) September 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 26, 2013>
Linda at Walmart A group of four volunteers sat outside Walmart Saturday morning with forget-me-nots and Walk to End Alzheimer's information.
This has been an annual event for the past several years.
When Sheila and I first set up, it seemed that no one was going to make eye contact and our "Good morning" greetings often when unanswered.
I couldn't help but think that this was going to be a waste of time.
We arrived early--eight thirty--in hopes of beating the heat.
We've gone through the entire summer with unusually cool weather, and here we were outside on a day when the thermometer was predicted to zoom into the nineties.
After thirty minutes, flies began to buzz and the sun barreled down on the spot where we had set up our table.
"Do we dare move it any closer?" I asked eyeballing the small spot of shade between the soda machine and the trashcan.
"We don't want to be so close that the door stays open." We left our table where it was and moved into the small spot of shade.
Then, people began to stop and ask about the Walk and about Alzheimer's.
The morning had started getting interesting.
They placed donations into our collection jar and we had them write names on the forget-me-nots.
Sometimes they wrote a loved one's name.
Other times, they wrote their own name.
I handed the marker to a little boy and he signed with scribbles.
"How old is he?" I asked.
"He's four.
His name is Cash." I smiled.
It never occurred to me that he was too young to write, and of course, he would have a distinctive name.
Most kids do now-a-days.
Sheila with Forget-Me-Nots "Sheila, with all the nice weather we've had this summer, why did we pick the hottest day to schedule this?" "Well, we didn't know it was going to be this hot," she pointed out.
I used a forget-me-not for a fan and she used a flyer.
From time to time, we saw people we knew, but most passersby were strangers to us.
Most had the story of loss that paves the path of the Alzheimer's journey.
Our donation jar filled up with dollars, fives, tens, and one twenty.
The forget-me-not skirt around our table grew in length.
We handed out team packets and donor envelopes.
People just walked past and stuffed in dollars.
Their voices murmured, "Mom," "grandpa," "husband," "friend..."   One woman wrote a name on a flower and said, "My mom won't go see the doctor, but we're pretty sure she has Alzheimer's."  I handed her a brochure.
"Call the number on the bottom.
They will help you even though you don't have a diagnosis.
Encourage your mom to get a medical workup to find out whether she does have Alzheimer's.
Other conditions can cause dementia symptoms and some are reversible." "Thank you so much!" she said.
"I never thought of that." Then, the highlight of my day--a woman named Betty told us about a new Alzheimer's Support Group.
Our group had dwindled, and we stopped having regular meetings.
People call me from time to time about support group and I refer them to the chapter and offer to meet with them.
Now, a woman stood in front of me telling me that she was going to have the required training to be a support group facilitator.
I wrote down the information.
"An Alzheimer's article is coming out in The Democrat," I said.
"She wants some information for a side-bar and this is so timely." Shortly after meeting Betty, Wyann brought the forget-me-nots and donations they had collected at the other entrance.
Soon, Jessica and Samantha brought over the money they had collected at Big Lots.
She also brought the yummy looking cupcakes she had left over.
It felt like mother nature had turned up the heat, and although we had rearranged our table to be in the shade, we were sweltering.
"Well, now we need to stay until all the cupcakes are gone," Sheila said.
"I'm game," I replied, "but I'm tired of drinking hot water.
I'll go to McDonald's and get us some iced tea." Two hours later, the iced tea was almost gone, and the last two cupcakes went to a woman who had four kids.
"They can share," she said.
As we packed up and folded the table, Sheila said, "You know, it was hot, but it was fun."  "It was!
I feel good about it," I said.
"I'm so excited about the Walk!" I took my things to my car and headed back to the store to get the items on my shopping list.
As I neared the entrance, a man holding two shopping bags said, "Whew, it's getting hot out here, isn't it?" "It sure is," I agreed just as I felt a blast of cold air from the open door.
The heat is on in Missouri, but that isn't going to stop us from doing what we can about Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) August 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 17, 2013>
Maybe it was because my grandkids went home and the house was too quiet.
Maybe it was just the thought of growing older and retiring.
Whatever caused it, I had dreams of my brother Donnie, of Jim, and days long gone by.
We were all younger in my dreams.
As I awakened from a deep sleep the words echoed through my head, "Those days have come and gone." It's hard to understand the world of dreams.
Sometimes they inspire me to write short stories or provide a scene for my novel in progress.
This time, the dreams weren't so important, or unusual, it was the truism that stood out from my night's sleep.
The past is a part of me that lingers in my mind just to be awakened in my alternate life--dreamland.
Dreams can seem so real at the time.
It made me think of Poe's "A Dream Within a Dream." Reality blurs with dreams, and it is possible to cling to the past of a "surf-tormented shore" while we watch the  sands of our lives slip through our hands.
Unlike Poe, I choose to not weep and fall into despair over the days that have come and gone.
Yes, at times, it is more challenging to put the past aside than others.
Keeping busy, working toward goals, feeling a sense of accomplishment are tools to push away the dark sadness of another time gone forever, another place that no longer exists.
Yet, the very busyness that helps keep the past from tormenting, can also cause regret.
Sometimes, I have to choose between obligations and inclinations.
If I'm not careful, I find myself having regrets that I let work interfere with family time.
But if I'm realistic, which I am most of the time, I realize that work has been a beneficial part of my life in more than a financial sense.
When Jim was in need of constant care, I needed work as a diversion from the overwhelming job of caregiving.
Being around my grandkids this week reminded me of when my kids were young.
Instead of just grabbing something, anything, to eat, I needed to think about meal planning, like when my sons were small.
Even going to the state fair took on a retro atmosphere.
It had been years since I stood on the Midway while the kids ran from one carnival ride to another.
I'm older, slower, and somewhat wiser now.
I wore comfortable shoes and used the umbrella I carried to shade me from the sun.
It was a week that took me back in time, but with changes.
Okay, I'll admit that I'm about a thousand times more indulgent with my grandkids than I was with my children.
My XM radio station was on the Disney channel all week.
My TV was tuned to cartoons and pre-teen shows.
I went to the movies, twice.
I drove by Kentucky Fried Chicken and ordered above the sound of the "La la la-la" Smurf happy song.
The question of the day became, "Is a Smurf's butt blue?" Just like in my dream, the past week of a house filled with  laughter, thumps, and bumps from morning to bedtime have come and gone.
It took me by surprise how much I missed it the instant the house took on its usual quiet, peaceful atmosphere.
I decided to go work for a few hours to take my mind off it.
I pulled my car out of the garage and the radio began to play "Chloe, You're the One I Want." I'd heard that song a dozen times in the past few days.
I shook my head and twisted the dial pausing on Escape, Praise, 80's on 8, and finally rested the dial on 60's on 6.
It was obvious that those days had come and gone.
I punched the button my granddaughter had set and listened to some here and now music to appreciate the blessing of today and  the tomorrows that are mine to enjoy.
Copyright (c) August 2013 by L.S.
Fisher  Http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 14, 2013>
Sunday, August 11, Hellen Cook's family received word that human remains were discovered near the search area where her scarf and shoes had been found in July.
Pending DNA identification, her family has identified jewelry as belonging to the seventy-two-year-old woman who had Alzheimer's disease.
Her husband of fifty years expressed his fear that she had been calling out for him and he couldn't find her.
Please remember this family in your prayers.
Wandering is a serious issue.
Sixty percent of people with dementia will wander and if not found within twenty-four hours half of them will suffer serious injury or death.
From the Alzheimer's Association at www.alz.org: The Alzheimer's Association encourages individuals and families coping with wandering to enroll in MedicAlert + Alzheimer's Association Safe Return(r), a nationwide identification program designed to assist in the return of those who wander and become lost.
Families seeking a more technologically advanced and robust program may consider the new Alzheimer's Association Comfort Zone program.
Family members can have knowledge of a person's location, while individuals with Alzheimer's can enjoy the emotional security of familiar routines and surroundings.
For more information about Comfort Zone, Medic Alert + Alzheimer's Association Safe Return or additional tips on coping with wandering and other safety issues related to dementia and Alzheimer's disease, visit www.alz.org/safetycenter or call the Association's 24/7 Helpline at 1.800.272.3900.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 12, 2013>
While browsing through my old health news letters prior to pitching them, I came across an interesting article on stress and memory.
The study involved rats and cats.
The rats learned their way through a water maze and were doing quite well until they were placed in cages next to cats.
Then, the rats forgot everything they had learned about the maze.
Don't you feel just like a rat trapped in a cage next to your worst enemy some days?
If you have the big bad world nipping at your heels, it's no wonder that your memory might fail you at the most crucial times.
When you consider the strain of being an Alzheimer's caregiver, it is no wonder that memory is not just a concern for the person with the disease.
Each stage of caregiving involves both emotional and physical stressors according to the Alzheimer's Association's 2013 Alzheimer's Disease Facts and Figures (p.33).
Research shows that caregiver's who are responsible for a person with Alzheimer's or a related dementia report higher stress levels than caregivers of older adults with other diseases.
In the United States, 15.4 million family or unpaid caregivers provide $17.5 billion worth of care to their loved ones with dementia.
Family caregivers provide an average of nine hours care per day.
Sixty-one percent rated emotional stress as very high and another thirty-nine percent rated the level as somewhat high.
When the stress levels are broken down further, fifty-six percent report "a good amount" of strain due to financial issues and another fifty-three percent cite family relationships.
The role of the primary caregiver intensifies as the disease progresses and creates health issues for the caregiver.
Stress suppresses  the immune system leaving caregivers vulnerable to physical problems.
Caregivers who feel they obligated to take on the role of caregiver report the highest levels of stress.
In addition to the stress and strain of being a dementia caregiver, you may have a little niggling thought that perhaps your memory isn't what it should be.
You know firsthand what a devastating disease Alzheimer's is and with your responsibilities, you can't possibly give up or give in to the doubts plaguing you about your own memory problems.
I think the only thing that really kept me from believing I was developing dementia on my own was the knowledge that dementia affects so much more than memory.
It chips away at long-term skills, not just those recently learned.
Yes, short term memory is the first symptom, but when you consider the effect stress has on memory, stress is a more likely scenario than dementia.
An important characteristic for a caregiver is optimism.
With Alzheimer's, your positive hopes for a cure are dashed, but that doesn't mean you can't do countless acts that will increase the quality of life for your loved one.
Continue to do as much as you can together for as long as possible.
Those days spent on drives, picnics in the park, walking hand-in-hand on a nice spring day will not only relieve the stress of caregiving, but also will remain in your heart.
Perhaps, like me, you have already noticed stress affects your ability to recall information.
Before you get too stressed out about your memory, think about rats and cats.
The best antidote for stress is relaxation.
Anything you can do to help lower your stress levels will improve your memory.
Quiet time is so important and time away, respite, can be a lifesaver for a caregiver.
You are not being selfish by needing that time.
When you improve your physical or emotional health, you become a better caregiver.
Your own health is one of the best gifts you can give your loved one.
Copyright (c) August 2013 by L.S.
Fisher htttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 5, 2013>
I recently read a featured article in our local paper about people who had joined a program called Healthy U.
Candidates are selected for the program and they learn life-changing strategies to help them lose weight and then maintain that weight loss.
One woman said her only hesitation was that her "before" weight would be published in the paper.
Now, we all know women when it comes to weight.
You can't shave a few pounds off the total when you have a public weigh-in.
And you don't have that advantage of weighing in the privacy of your home when you first wake up--before coffee, breakfast, and anything else that seems to make you weigh an extra five pounds.
Who ever thought clothing could be so darned heavy!
The Healthy U candidate I admired the most was the lady that hadn't lost any weight at all.
In fact, she had gained a few pounds.
She had the courage to see the positives in the program.
She was healthier and had much more stamina.
She looked beyond the tattle-tale scale and saw that she had "gained" health, not weight.
When we think about the things in life that are really important, good health will top that list almost every time.
What would it matter if you had accumulated wealth, power, fortune, or fame but did not have good health?
We all know people who deal with chronic illness on a daily basis.
Then, we have all seen courage and faith improve quality of life for our loved ones who have terminal illnesses.
Anyone that struggles with a health problem that can be controlled through health and exercise knows that true lifestyle changes require more than good intensions.
It requires persistence, diligence, and a serious commitment.
I should know.
After all I'm the queen of failed diets and abandoned exercise plans.
I've always been blessed with good health.
At least that's how I think of my health since I'm seldom sick.
As I've gotten older, I started to find out about all those hidden health markers that undermine my complacency about health.
It's not just the number on the scales that keeps creeping upward--it's those pesky lipid panel numbers.
Just about the time I think I have one of them licked, a different one sets off the "High" alarm.
Now, I'm working with my new best friend, the dietician.
I have a time limit to get the numbers under control or I have to add a new medication to my pill organizer.
I have to admit that it feels good to lose a few pounds, and I don't consider this new approach a diet.
It's more of a challenge to make smarter choices.
I looked through the list of foods I have to choose from and a funny thing happened.
I never saw a single cake, cookie, pie, or donut on there.
So, at the dinner meeting last week, dinner was healthy--tilapia--but dessert was cobbler and ice cream.
At my request, they served me fresh strawberries and cantaloupe.
Since I love both, I enjoyed my dessert.
One of the things I really like about this approach is the dietician asked me what foods I really liked, and she made suggestions for snacks that fell into my favorite foods.
When I told her about my weakness for miniature chocolate bars, she said I could have two of them for a snack occasionally.
I'm sure I'll fall off the wagon and have a dessert once in a while, but this is really important to me.
As I gear up for retirement, good health is at the top of the list.
If it takes a little behavior modification on my part, the rewards far outweigh the sacrifices.
Copyright (c) August 2013 by L.S.
Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 29, 2013>
Hellen Cook who has Alzheimer's has been missing since July 13 from her Warsaw, Missouri, home.
She is 72 years old, weighs 97 pounds, has brown hair and hazel eyes.
She is 4'10" tall.
Some of her personal items were found near a large pond, but divers and search dogs have not found Hellen.
Dogs lost her scent at the highway so it is possible that someone gave her a ride.
Her family is frantic to find her.
Please, if you see her, call 911.
Pass her picture on to all your Facebook friends in other states.
Keep looking and keep posting until Hellen is home.
Remember her and her family in your prayers. 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 27, 2013>
Hellen Cook, Vulnerable Adult Missing It's every Alzheimer's caregiver's nightmare--a loved one has gone missing and can't be found.
On July 13, Hellen Cook tended to yard work while her husband mowed at their home in Warsaw, Missouri.
Her husband left for fifteen or twenty minutes to return his mower to the barn, and when he returned, Hellen no longer sat on the porch swing.
She had vanished.
Yes, I know that heart-stopping moment firsthand.
While we were still seeking a diagnosis for Jim, he accompanied me, and several members of our Board of Directors on a business trip to Las Vegas.
Everything was going fine until we were at the airport headed home.
While I went to get our boarding passes, Jim had to go to the restroom.
It was within sight of where I was standing.
I finished and then became concerned about why he hadn't returned.
One of the directors went into the restroom to check on him, and discovered that he wasn't there.
"We'll find him," Francis said, probably with much more confidence than he felt.
The directors fanned out and within ten minutes had found Jim.
"He was pretty easy to spot," Don Joe said with a laugh.
And he was, wearing a bright red Kansas City T-shirt and a cowboy hat.
That was only the first of many searches.
I was by myself when I lost him at the mall.
Security helped me find him.
Once again, he had gone to the bathroom but went the wrong direction when he came out.
I lost him at Silver Dollar City--twice--and one of those times he had our grandson with him.
I learned the hard way that the bathroom had two exits.
All it took was for me to be distracted for a few minutes and he would be gone.
I was folding clothes one time and my sister-in-law called to say Jim was walking down the road in front of their house.
One time a neighbor found him several miles from home and close to the highway.
Of all the times he went missing, the scariest one was the night I woke up to discover he wasn't in bed.
After I searched the house and realized he was gone, I was frantic.
Thankfully, he always stayed on the road and walked the same direction, so I did know where to start looking.
I got in the car and found him within a few miles of home.
He was fully dressed, complete with dark sunglasses, cowboy hat, and using his cane.
Even the best caregivers can lose track of someone with Alzheimer's.
Sixty percent of people with Alzheimer's wander.
The Alzheimer's Association has two programs to help with the search efforts.
One is MedicAlert + Safe Return.
Jim was registered with Safe Return.
Although it doesn't keep them from wandering it does help activate the search immediately.
The ID jewelry will alert others that the person is memory impaired and all they have to do is call the toll free number.
A new program, Comfort Zone,  uses technology to remotely monitor a person with Alzheimer's.
If they leave the pre-set safety zone, family members can be alerted via email, text message, mobile phone, or the internet.
I'm excited about this new program and could see how it would be more reliable than counting on neighbors to notice that a person with dementia seems to be lost.
If your loved one is lost, don't search for more than fifteen minutes without calling for help.
When you dial 911, tell them a vulnerable adult is missing.
Beginning a timely search is crucial to finding your loved one.
The Alzheimer's Association shares the statistic that ninety-four percent of people who wander are found within a mile and a half of where they disappeared.
The more people who search immediately, the better chance you have of finding your loved one.
Hundreds have joined the search for Hellen Cook, who went missing two weeks ago.
Dogs were used early on but they lost her scent at the highway.
That led everyone to believe that she had been picked up by someone in a car.
Family, friends, and other volunteers, including the Alzheimer's Association local chapter, conducted a ground search.
In a wooded area near a pond they found boots, a scarf, and a hat believed to belong to Hellen.
The search continues for Hellen and her loved ones are more fearful each day.
Please be on the lookout for Hellen, and remember her and her family in your prayers.
Copyright (c) July 2013 by L.S.
Fisher Www.earlyonset.blogspot.com Sources:  http://www.examiner.net/news/x624134505/Focus-turns-to-pond-in-search-for-missing-woman http://www.alz.org/care/alzheimers-dementia-wandering.asp
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 21, 2013>
A primary caregiver has a tremendous emotional stake in meeting his or her responsibilities to his loved one.
Although taking care of the physical needs of someone who has Alzheimer's is challenging, a survey of caregivers revealed that their biggest challenge was grief.
When you are a caregiver, your grief is anticipatory.
Once you've heard the diagnosis and accepted the inevitable outcome, you can't help but grieve about the future.
The future looks bleak, and you may want to grab time and make it stand still.
My first reaction after hearing the Alzheimer's diagnosis was, "There is medicine for that, isn't there?" I had paid scant attention to Alzheimer's, but had heard that treatments had been developed.
It was a real wake up call to find out the treatment for Alzheimer's only helps with symptoms and does not slow down, much less stop, the disease.
Grief for a caregiver is also ambiguous, without a defined beginning or end.
You may not begin to grieve until you've completed tests to rule out treatable conditions.
Since Alzheimer's is often diagnosed by ruling out other possibilities, you may go through a time when you think that what your loved one has will get better with time.
Some of the theories we heard: depression, low blood sugar, vitamin B deficiency, stroke.
It's pretty bad when you latch onto the possibility of a stroke.
Yes, strokes are bad, but there is hope that you can recover from a stroke.
After all the tests, and treatments for other possible conditions, Jim continued to lose more skills.
So when did the grieving process begin?
I'm just not sure.
Was it the day he asked me to tune his guitar?
Jim was a master musician who played by ear and it always seemed magical to me how he could hear the slightest nuance when something was out of tune.
Me, I can't tune a guitar, never could, and never will be able to, and Jim should have known that.
Could it have been the day I realized he could no longer read the books he loved?
Maybe it was the time he couldn't remember how to work the remote control.
I really don't remember the day when the grieving started, and I can't remember when it stopped.
All I know is that it was always there right beside me throughout the years of dementia and loss.
It didn't even stop when he died.
I know a lot of people say their grieving is done before death happens.
Well, it didn't work that way for me.
Death was another loss in a series of losses.
I wasn't able to shut the grief off magically.
It's often the little things that remind me of the great big hole Jim left behind.
After I figured all the grieving was finished, and I'd put it behind me, I noticed it at odd times.
There was the day I decided to donate his clothes to charity.
Yeah, I know I should have done it sooner.
I could have given away his clothes once I realized he wouldn't be wearing anything other than sweatpants, T-shirts, or sweatshirts.
No, I waited.
I was doing pretty good until I came across his very favorite shirt.
I just couldn't part with it.
Maybe some day I'll be able to, but it felt like trying to let go of his memory and I wasn't ready.
That's the thing about grief.
It's personal and lives inside of us.
No one can make another person let go of the grief until it is time.
You won't wake up one morning and find that the grief has just gone away.
Nope.
It leaves when it's good and ready.
The thing about grief is, you learn to live with it until you can live without it.
Eventually, you begin to look forward to the day, to life, and have a greater appreciation of family and friends.
You have learned that time is much too precious to waste, and you refuse to let unbridled grief steal it away.
The best way to honor the memory of a person you loved and lost is to live life to the fullest.
Copyright (c) July 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 13, 2013>
Caregiver Emotion #6 - Defensiveness After the Alzheimer's diagnosis, you probably delved deep to find all the information you could to be the best caregiver possible.
You searched reliable sources on the Internet, contacted the Alzheimer's Association for educational opportunities, and attended support group to learn about first-hand experiences.
After all your work and dedication to caregiving, cousin Sally breezes in for a ten minute visit and proceeds to list things that you are doing wrong and critiquing your job as a primary caregiver.
Is it any wonder you become defensive?
Now, before you push Sally out the door and refuse to take any additional calls from her, pause to consider if anything she said had merit.
She may not have presented her "help" in the right tone of voice or in a tactful way, but perhaps if you sift through her suggestions, you might find one useful nugget.
Since you are the one with experience, and the one who knows your loved one best, you are responsible for using best practices while caring for your loved one, even if your least favorite cousin Sally suggested it.
When you are a caregiver for a person with Alzheimer's, you learn how your loved one reacts to environmental changes.
It may not take much to throw everything out of kilter.
A gathering of friends and family may once have been something you looked forward to, but now you know it will only confuse the person you are caring for.
Rather than just being defensive if someone criticizes your change in entertainment patterns, take a few minutes to explain that circumstances have changed.
You don't want to isolate your loved one, but it will be helpful for friends and family to visit in small groups rather than hosting big events.
One place you do need to be defensive is if anyone tries to take advantage of your loved one.
During the early stages, Jim was the telemarketer's best friend.
It seemed that he always agreed to anything they suggested.
It wasn't unusual to come home after work and have Jim say.
"Someone called about that thing." "What thing?" "You know, that we want." "Who called?" "I have no idea." After a few of those conversations, I installed caller ID.
I often had to call to cancel TV programs, donations to various charities, tickets to events we couldn't attend, and occasionally say no to people we knew who really should have known not to make agreements with Jim.
Primary caregivers have to be defensive when it comes to protecting the person with dementia, but not let defensiveness keep them from accepting help or valuable information.
As with every aspect of caring for a person with Alzheimer's, you need to control emotions, like defensiveness, in order to make the best caregiving decisions.
Copyright (c) July 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 6, 2013>
Tommy Capps, Finalist for 2013 American Hero of the Year Independence Day is a time for Americans to take stock of their freedom and think about the human sacrifice that has given it to us.
As far as unpopular wars, the Vietnam War has to be at the top of the list.
We were a country divided, and the very people who risked their lives to fight for  our country  were not given a heroes' welcome when they returned home.
For the first time, war was brought into American homes on the news each day.
Even the blood and gore we saw on TV didn't do justice to the reality of being in a jungle with no way to tell friend from foe.
The Wall in Washington D.C. lists the names of 58,272 people who lost their lives in Vietnam.
Others came home injured in body, and countless others came home with shattered spirit.
Vietnam veterans became a stereotype, and Jim would often turn a TV show off in disgust saying, "Another crazed Vietnam veteran is the killer." Hollywood's idea of a Vietnam veteran was of a trained killer, not a young man who was drafted into jungle warfare against an invisible enemy.
When my eighteen-year-old brother Tommy was drafted and sent to Vietnam, we were all scared for what he would be facing, but my mother was terrified.
Three months after his tour of duty began, I woke up one night to hear voices and my mother crying and I knew it had to be about Tommy.
I kept thinking, he can't be dead or I would feel it.
I finally realized he had been wounded and was in the states.
Recently, my sister-in-law nominated Tommy for the American Hero of the Year award.
This time, the phone call was good news when my brother found out he was a finalist for Hero of the Year when he didn't even know he had been nominated.
Tommy has shown courage his entire life.
After Vietnam he returned to high school and graduated the same year I did.
He was a positive influence on the high school kids and I'm sure a lot of would-be dropouts continued their education.
He worked in law enforcement as a deputy, chief of police, and detective.
Eventually, he worked for the state of Missouri investigating child abuse cases.
He was instrumental in sending 230 child abusers and pedophiles to prison.
In a five-hundred word essay, Teresa only touched on a few of the highlights.
Tommy's family and friends could tell hundreds of stories about how he's made his corner of the world better.
How he's been the one you could count on to always do the right thing--maybe not exactly what you asked for, but what you needed.
Tommy has been my hero for years, now America has a chance to make him their hero too.
Go to the website http://militaryhero.com/vote  and sign up for an account.
Once you've signed up, sign in and vote once each day between now and August 6.
Tommy is already a winner in the contest as well as life.
Copyright (c) July 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, June 30, 2013>
Capps Cousins My mom and dad both came from big families and I have a hundred or so cousins.
Growing up, I knew my Whittle cousins quite well.
We saw each other frequently at Grandma and Grandpa Whittle's house in Stover.
The ones close to my age became like additional sisters to me.
I even got to know some of the younger kids who seemed like pests at the time, but I still formed that family bond with them.
I never had the same close attachment with my cousins on my dad's side of the family.
My only contact with them was during sporadic family reunions, usually at my Aunt Freida's house.
Because of the reunion location, the cousin I saw most consistently on the Capps side of the family was Karen.
I was in my early teens when I met my cousins Charlie and Sharyn, but we became pen pals and they both came to my high school graduation.
Time passed and it seemed that I only saw my cousins at funerals, usually with little time to visit and become reacquainted.
When Charlie died, my mom and I went to the funeral.
Sharyn was heartbroken to lose her only sibling.
We exchanged addresses but our written communication was limited to Christmas cards.
Jim was in the nursing home in Marshall where Sharyn lived and we occasionally had lunch together.
A few years ago, my Christmas card was returned, and I never received one from her with a new address.
It is easy to lose touch with people and yet with Facebook it is so easy to connect.
Last winter, my cousin Karen suggested that I friend my cousin Marge.
Soon, we were talking about a cousins reunion in the summer.
As the time grew closer, we firmed up a date.
My brother Tommy offered to host the reunion.
He asked me to get hold of my aunt and uncle that lived in Sedalia and their daughter.
I told him I could do that.
"How about Sharyn?" I asked.
"Can you call her?"  "I'm sure I can track her down," I said.
"I know her married name, and I think she lives at Marshall." After we hung up, I placed the call to my aunt and uncle.
They were excited about a reunion.
Then I tried to find Sharyn on Google.
I couldn't find her, so I pulled out an area wide phone book and there she was--listed at Sweet Springs.
I'd been spelling her last name wrong.
Oh, well, since all I was looking for was a phone number, I called the number in the book.
Busy.
After several attempts, She's probably on dial up Internet, I thought.
The next day, I called and a recording said the number had been disconnected.
My phone book was several years old, so I asked a co-worker, Dawn, if she had a newer directory.
She said, "I always look on People Find." "Oh, I couldn't find her on Google, but I was spelling Sharyn's name wrong." I spelled the name and she turned to me and said, "It says she's deceased." "What?
No one in the family knew that.
Maybe it's not her."  Dawn plugged the name in Google and up popped Sharyn's obituary.
She had died two years ago.
After I shared the shocking news, I realized how important this reunion was.
I knew Marge had lost three brothers that I never really had a chance to know.
The day of the reunion was a beautiful sunny, warm summer day.
As we sat in Tommy's lanai, we took turns talking about what we did, our families, our passions.
"When I was growing up, I thought Dad had about fifteen brothers and sisters," my sister Terri said.
My two aunts at the reunion--Rosemary (Runt) and Freida (Dede) both laughed.
"Dad is the one that gave us the nicknames," Rosemary said.
"I thought Robert did," said my cousin Robin.
I nodded agreement.
Her mother, Shirley (Tot) had always said my dad had given them the nicknames.
Aunt Shirley passed away two years ago, and I remembered her saying the same thing many times.
We heard stories of heartbreak, my brother Jimmy and my cousin Mary had both lost daughters.
My cousin Karen shared the humorous story of my mom and Aunt Freida's trip to California to visit her sister "Dude." My aunt Freida stepped off the train to make sure they were on the correct train, and the train left with my mom, my mentally handicapped cousin Laney, my aunt's ticket, purse, and luggage.
Even without money or proof of identity, my aunt managed to get on the next train and arrived shortly after my mom and Laney.
"That's why we take her now," Karen finished.
"Laney is my favorite cousin," my brother Jimmy said.
"She's my biggest fan." Laney beamed from ear-to-ear.
My aunt takes her to the nursing home when Jimmy, my mom, and friends play music.
After sharing abbreviated stories of our lives, we moved to the yard for pictures and conversation.
My mom, Jimmy, and Mitchell played music with others joining in to sing.
Family ties brought us together, but it was the beating heart of family helped us bond.
Copyright (c) June 2013 by L.S.
Fisher Http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 22, 2013>
Before I even knew Sarah Harris, her words in the national Alzheimer's newsletter resonated with me.
When she spoke at the candlelight vigil many years ago, she said, "Alzheimer's is a lonely disease." Dementia disrupts personal relationships in a way that few other diseases do.
As a caregiver, you will miss the give and take of your relationship with your loved one.
Jim developed aphasia early on in the disease.
He changed from a man who laughed and joked and shared his deepest thoughts with me to one who seldom spoke a word.
He once could play any instruments with strings, but gradually he struggled to play his guitar.
Jim had known the lyrics to several hundred songs, but eventually, he would only attempt a few songs and often sang only the chorus over and over.
I missed meaningful communication with my husband.
Our relationship gradually evolved and each transition increased the loneliness.
Another factor of loneliness is that some friends back away, especially when those friendships involve another couple.
Activities are no longer the equal friendships from before and your loved one cannot participate at the same level.
Other friends may simply not know what to say or how to react to odd behavior.
You will learn to rely on the ones who take the changes in stride and continue to support you in your changing roles.
Eating out can be a real challenge.
Once, we went out to eat at a nice restaurant with our friends Rick and Robby.
We all know how cold restaurants can be,  and with Jim on blood thinners, he began to shiver uncontrollably.
Robby went to their car and got a blanket that she wrapped around Jim.
After our meal came, we discovered that the fish Jim ordered had bones in it.
Noticing that it looked like Jim didn't remember how to remove the bones, his old fishing buddy, Rick, took a steak knife and filleted the fish leaving him only the boneless portion to eat.
Spending time with trusted friends or family who make your loved one feel part of the group is a good way to combat loneliness.
These special people can lend some normalcy to a world that at many times seems anything but normal.
We often socialize with friends based on an activity that we have in common.
Whether you play golf, play cards, ride motorcycles, or have backyard barbecues, a loss of skill may make continuing as a couple impossible, or dangerous.
Your loved one may also become uneasy in crowds or a different environment causing him distress and anxiety for you.
People who are more casual acquaintances, may not realize the activity is no longer appropriate for your loved one.
It may be simpler to turn down invitations, increasing the gap between you and your friends.
To keep from being left out of all the fun, you can plan a get-together with a small group where  your loved one is more comfortable.
Or, you may want to find someone to stay with your loved one so that you can enjoy an outing.
You don't want to isolate yourself from people who can support you and offer you companionship.
Widen your circle of friends by joining a club, volunteering, or attending charity events.
Being a part of these groups will not only help you find new friends, but it can also keep you busy while making a worthwhile contribution to your community.
I found the best way to battle loneliness was to be comfortable with being alone.
After the tough decision to place Jim in a nursing home, I returned to school to earn my bachelor's degree.
Working full time and studying for my classes didn't leave much time to feel sorry for myself or to feel lonely.
One of the better decisions I made was to join a local business women's group.
Our town is small, but our local is the largest  Business Women of Missouri club.
I've made friends with women throughout Missouri that I would never have known otherwise.
I also joined two writers' guilds.
I gained a new group of friends where I found encouragement, support, and learned invaluable information to build on my desire to write.
Whatever your interests, you can combat loneliness by taking a chance on joining with like-minded people.
Yes, Alzheimer's is a lonely disease, but keeping active is your best defense.
Don't be afraid to leave your comfort zone, especially when you are feeling sad and alone.
After all, loneliness is an emotional response to isolation, so surround yourself with friends and family who uplift you and fill your need for interaction with others through the giving and receiving of friendship.
Copyright June 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 15, 2013>
Jim used to say I was a worrywart, and I can't deny that it was (and still is) true.
At one time I remember telling him, "I have to worry, because you don't."  When we were first married, I worried about money because we never seemed to have too much of it.
Paying bills on time and not racking up debt was important to me.
I also felt a need for the safety net of putting a little aside for unexpected expenses.
Although I was always conscious of our financial situation, one time I made an error in my checkbook.
The bank didn't return the check, but notified me that I needed more money in my account.
We had money in another account, but I was worried because I received the notice on a weekend and the bank was closed.
It so happened that Jim was in the hospital in the stress unit and his mom and dad didn't want me to tell him about the problem with the bank.
The  minute Jim saw my face, he demanded to know what was wrong.
When I told him, he said, "Honey, when a problem can be solved by throwing a little money at it, it just isn't worth worrying about." Those were wise words, indeed.
Unfortunately, many of the worries you have as  a caregiver cannot be solved with money.
Being a caregiver to a person who has dementia is demanding and requires a lot of patience.
You might worry that you don't have the qualities you need to take care of your loved one.
Sometimes a bigger worry is that if your loved one is being cared for by someone else, substitute caregivers may not meet all of his  needs.
You worry that your loved one feels abandoned or is lonely and afraid.
You can even worry about worrying!
It can become an endless cycle of worry that can put gray hair on your head, or worse, bring on other health problems.
What can you do to break the cycle?
I've found a few good diversions that help me keep worry under control.
First, stay active and busy.
This will give you something else to think about other than the problem that is worrying you.
Second, look for solutions.
Instead of just worrying for the sake of worrying, calm down and think about ways to lessen your anxiety.
I worried about Jim falling when he was in the nursing home.
He was trying to get up in the mornings before the aides came to help him out of bed, and they were finding him on the floor.
Jim had always been an early riser, so I suggested they wake him up about five in the morning and help him out of bed.
Problem solved.
Third, share your worries with friends, family members, a support group, or a therapist.
When you share your worries it accomplishes a couple of things.
Talking about it can result in thinking out loud and you might be able to find a solution or at least come to grips with your emotional dilemma.
Other people may suggest ideas that you never considered.
Many of the big problems in life that fill our days and nights with worry cannot be resolved, and with those problems, you will need to find methods that help you manage your worry.
It may be as complex as regular visits to a therapist, or as simple as reading a good book at bedtime to take your mind off your worries so you can go to sleep.
The important thing is to find what works for you.
Copyright (c) June 2013 by L. S. Fisher Http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 8, 2013>
When you are a caregiver for a loved one with a serious health problem like Alzheimer's, you might find that you need anger management classes.
Of course, you are going to be so busy with day-to-day duties that you aren't going to have time for any additional activities.
What does it take to push your buttons and make you see red?
Something that normally doesn't bother you can trigger a rise in blood pressure when you are emotionally vulnerable.
It is important to learn to recognize and address the issues that cause you to react with anger, especially if it is your loved one you are angry with.
The characteristics of Alzheimer's can grate on the caregiver's nerves.
Repetitive behavior can be distressing to the caregiver.
One of the early symptoms of Alzheimer's is loss of short term memory which causes your loved one to forget they already asked you a question and that you answered them.
It will do no good to point out that you already answered and to let your irritation turn into anger.
It is better to answer the question again.
Be aware that although your loved one might be asking you one question, due to failing communication skills, he may actually intend to ask a different question.
Be vigilant to make sure your loved one's needs are being met.
Often, you can distract or redirect your loved one.
Pacing is another repetitive behavior that can bother a caregiver.
Jim used to pace through the house constantly.
The bad thing was that the minute I was distracted, he would pace right out the door and down the gravel road.
He would never turn around and come back, so I would have to get in the car and go after him.
After about five or six trips to pick him up, I would find that I was seething.
Sometimes, it helped if I just went for a walk with him.
Although, he might take off again given a chance, at least the walks were a good stress reliever for me!
Another thing that can anger a caregiver is unfair criticism of how you are caring for your loved one, especially from someone who isn't helping.
You may not feel like explaining every situation, but until someone has been a primary caregiver for a person with Alzheimer's, they can't comprehend what it's like to walk in your shoes.
You may be angry at the disease that is taking your loved one away.
Alzheimer's has no cure and treatment only addresses the symptoms.
To help assuage my anger at the disease, I became an Alzheimer's volunteer.
The Walk to End Alzheimer's was a way to help the Chapter provide support and services to help families coping with dementia.
I became an advocate to add my voice in support of research to find a cure.
By helping others, I helped myself more.
You can't predict every situation that is going to make you angry, but you can alleviate some of the tension by taking a step back before you react.
You don't have to count to ten but take a few deep breaths and think before you do or say something you will regret.
Humor helps tremendously.
If you can see the humor in the situation, it may keep you from ever being angry in the first place.
As long as your anger causes no harm to your loved one, you can also see the humor in that.
Occasional anger is a normal emotion, and as long as you control your anger and not let it control you, it should not affect your ability to be a calm, patient caregiver.
Of course, regularly taking a break from caregiving helps your mood and energizes you to continue providing a loving and safe environment for your loved one.
Copyright (c) June 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com  
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 31, 2013>
Resentment is an emotion you may not want to admit you have.
You usually try to keep it at bay and not let it define the kind of person you are.
Yet, for Alzheimer's caregivers, it is hard not to feel resentment from time-to-time.
Resentment comes in many forms.
You may resent other family members if you don't think they are pulling their weight.
Or, you may resent a family member who seems to take over and not listen to your ideas or opinions.
In turn, if you are not the caregiver, she may resent you for not supporting her, or second guessing her, when she is making tough decisions.
At times, you may find that you even resent your loved one for not cooperating when you are trying to help.
I know that when I tried to take Jim to daycare, he would balk and refuse to go most of the time.
I  wanted him to go to daycare so that I could keep him at home longer rather than make the nursing home decision.
He didn't understand that--he just knew he wanted to stay at home.
Resentment can build because life just seems to be out of control.
All your well-laid plans go awry, and there isn't a darn thing you can do to make life normal again.
In the case of early onset, you may have been looking forward to retirement just to see your retirement dreams vanish.
Instead of travel and relaxation, you are a full-time caregiver taking on an overwhelming job.
One thing is for sure--if you are consumed with resentment, you need to find a way to overcome this self-destructive emotion before it turns into anger.
Have you ever thought that when you are resentful, it is such an internal emotion that you are often the only person affected?
Okay, now that you've identified an emotion you want no part of, what can you do?
Think about the things that make you resentful, and seek a solution for each one.
If you are feeling that you are doing much more than your share, ask for help.
Often family members don't even realize that you need help.
You may seem so confident and capable, that they feel inadequate to try taking your place even for a short time.
If you're resentful of your loved one's behavior, just remember that the disease causes the behavior and your loved one is not just being willful.
I always knew that Jim's behavior was something he couldn't help.
Don't get me wrong, he was always stubborn, but not unreasonable.
No one can overcome the effects of damaged brain cells.
My mom always said, "If a person has a broken leg, no one expects them to walk on that leg." Her point was that Alzheimer's was much more of a physical problem than a broken leg, and no one could expect Jim to think the same with a diseased brain as he did with a healthy one.
I coped with the resentment of having no control over the progression of the disease by focusing on what I could do.
I could see that Jim had all the tests to determine he did not have an irreversible condition, and that he had the best treatment options available.
Then, I volunteered for the Alzheimer's Association because it provided a positive experience for me.
It helped me to know that I could help raise funds for the Alzheimer's Association support and services to benefit other caregivers.
I became an advocate so I could educate legislators on both the state and national level on the urgency of funding effective treatments for Alzheimer's, or better yet, a cure.
Resentment may be a feeling you want to hide, but it is a normal, human emotion.
Just like all negative emotions, it can damage your physical and emotional health, or you can use it to make yourself stronger.
Coping with resentment, can make you more assertive, in a good way, which can help you be a better caregiver, which in turn, helps your loved one's quality of life.
Copyright (c) May 2013 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 25, 2013>
Recently, I read an article on caregiver emotions, and thought the idea worth expanding on.
Having been a caregiver for ten years, I was familiar with all the emotions featured in the article, as well as several others.
Emotions can run high for caregivers, and I suppose that if you asked what a caregiver was feeling, guilt could easily be at the top of the list.
Even good caregivers feel guilt no matter how unfounded.
Some of us just have this little guilt complex that travels rampantly throughout our brains.
I don't know about you, but I can manage to feel guilty over trivial matters.
Some of the guilt associated with caregivers can be circumstances that seem entirely beyond our control.
One of the guilt generators can be how a caregiver can be pulled in a lot of different directions at one time.
I think this is especially true when the person with dementia is young.
I know that I was conflicted with work and my responsibilities to care for Jim.
Since I was only in my mid-forties when Jim began to need someone to watch over him, I didn't think that quitting my job was an option.
That is not the decision every caregiver makes, and I could see where both options could cause some feelings of guilt.
Had I taken a leave of absence, it would have lasted for several years because Alzheimer's develops over time and can last for ten to twenty years.
There were several advantages to keeping my job, one of which was to keep my health insurance.
With good insurance, we were able to afford the diagnostic tests necessary to determine the type of disease and scope of the damage to Jim's brain.
The insurance meant we could afford the expensive medication.
I was also able to continue making a living that paid the bills and avoided the stress and strain involved with having to make hard choices of medical care or paying the electric bill.
Another advantage of working is that although Jim was never off my mind, I did have something apart from caregiving to fill my days.
I was able to interact with other people at a time that Jim became silent and no longer carried on a conversation.
The downside was that I scrambled to find someone to watch him during the day.
Between family, professional caregivers, my day off each week, and vacation, we managed to have someone with him at all times.
It wasn't easy, and had it not been for a flexible work schedule, it would have been an impossible situation.
I still managed to feel guilty at times because I wasn't there for him when he needed me, but in retrospect, I think it was the right decision for me.
Still, since I used all the caregivers during the workday, it meant that nights and weekends were my turn.
Sometimes, Jim would be stubborn and uncooperative, and occasionally, I would lose patience.
I beat myself up for those times when I blamed him rather than the disease.
One time, I yelled at him and just about the time I felt totally like a worm, he started laughing at me over the colorful language I had used.
We wound up having a good laugh over it, and it makes a happy memory rather than a guilt-ridden moment.
I think one of the most common reasons caregivers feel guilt is the nursing home decision.
No matter how necessary, or thoughtful, the decision, it tends to make a caregiver feel that she has let down the person she loves.
It is especially difficult when the family has promised they will never put their loved one in a nursing home.
Caregiver feel like they have broken a promise when making the only decision that makes sense in the situation.
The nursing home decision was one I struggled with and put off as long as possible.
Jim only slept a few hours a night and I was constantly exhausted.
He began to wander off and no matter how careful we were, it only took a split second for him to disappear.
It finally got to the point that we needed to put him in a safe place before he wandered off and we couldn't find him.
In that case, there would be no nursing home decision necessary.
In my opinion, that wasn't an option.
Unbridled guilt isn't good for anyone.
To help take control of your attitude, you need to have a reality check.
If you are doing your best as a caregiver, and as a person, that is all you can do.
There is a huge gap between reality and perfection.
You don't need to be the best caregiver in the world, you just need to be the best caregiver you can be.
In the end, you need to make tough decisions that are not only best for your loved one, but also for you, the caregiver.
Copyright (c) May 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 20, 2013>
For some reason the phrase, "A friend in need is a friend indeed" has been on my mind all week.
Odd, that a saying I cannot recall ever using in my life should be echoing through my brain nonstop.
I suppose many things could have triggered this thought.
It could have been the news story of three women who forged a bond during a decade of captivity.
Or it could have been the finalists on American Idol who seemed to value friendship over winning the title.
Although, my DVR kicked off during the final moments, I later saw a picture of a frozen moment of time--Kree, with a look of pure joy, turned toward a stunned Candace.
Maybe part of it could be tuning in to re-runs of Golden Girls and seeing the interaction between Blanche, Rose, and Dorothy--friends who fuss, fight, banter, and insult each other but still love each other.
These fascinating events could have been the impetus behind my obsession about the nuances of friendship, but I think it was more personal than that.
I have been blessed with the gift of abundant friendship from some truly amazing men and women.
My friendship list, and not the one on Facebook, reads like the Who's Who of Friends Indeed.
My first friends are made up of family and co-workers.
Over the past fifteen years, I've greatly widened my circle of friends by giving time to groups, clubs, and organizations.
I've become friends with like-minded people I would never have met otherwise.
Although, I would love to honor all my friends, I've decided to limit it to one handsome southern gentleman and three women I met during my first Alzheimer's advocacy visit to Washington, D.C. Ralph and I were party crashers at a reception for executive directors.
We were board members who had come to the forum and didn't know anyone besides the executive directors of our chapters.
He and I wound up exploring the Capitol city and became fast friends.
Ralph declared himself to be the oldest advocate, but he knew he had to do everything he could for his lovely wife.
In the first plenary session, a woman with smooth brown hair framing her face stood up to talk about her husband who had early onset Alzheimer's.
She echoed my own concerns that not enough was being done to find a cure, and that if one came, it was probably going to be too late.
I understood her pain and heartbreak.
When the session ended, I made my way through the crowd of people and introduced myself to Jane.
It was like finding a long lost friend.
Later that first year, I met two more women, Kathy and Sarah.
Kathy had a winning smile and flashing eyes.
Sarah, slim and trim, was beautiful inside and out.
We four women, plus Ralph, became inseparable.
We had the bond of being caregivers for spouses with Alzheimer's, and after sharing the heartbreak and sadness, we often regaled each other with humorous stories.
The one thing we all had in common was a wacky sense of humor.
Just like in the movies, we met at the same place, same time each year at the forum.
Sometimes we shared a few emails between, but it seemed as if the forum was our special time, our sister/brotherhood time.
Each year was a reunion of heart friends.
Jane and I roomed together a few times.
In our down time, we spent time people watching and making up stories about them.
"See that woman in the slinky dress and high heels?
She's on her way to meet a lover." Another year, we stood watch over the building across the street that had suspicious activity every night.
Big limos parked in front of it and random lights came on in offices.
"Spies!" we decided.
We spent so much time together that some people thought I was from New York too.
When the New York group bought tickets to a play at Ford's Theatre, Jane insisted they buy one for her roommate.
Time passed and our reunions were sobered by death as we lost our spouses, one by one.
Then one year Jane didn't come.
A few years later, Ralph didn't come.
Now Kathy, Sarah, and I meet each year with hugs, laughter, and tears.
They each hold a special place in my heart, and I am so thankful to know them.
We are friends indeed and our love for each other surpasses the bounds of time and distance.
Copyright (c) May 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 3, 2013>
Winter stretched into spring and blew in with a vengeance in March.
April came, and we breathed a sigh of relief, although spring was late coming.
Earlier in the week, I noticed that my lilacs had finally bloomed and filled the air with their distinctive scent.
May apples formed umbrellas and Missourians took to the woods in search of morel mushrooms.
May came with seventy-degree weather.
Then, this morning the unexpected happened, and I woke up to snow.
Seriously?
Snow in May?
Yes, I know, snow had been predicted, but I figured we might have some white flakes mixed in with rain, but it would melt as soon as it hit the ground.
Instead, it snowed for several hours and the ground was piled with puffy white snow more befitting a winter day--not a May day.
Through my patio door, I could see green leaves covered with snow.
It almost looked surreal.
I can't recall ever seeing Mother Nature so confused.
I could see how a heating/cooling system could wear out trying to keep up with the drastic changes in temperature.
A forty-degree variance in one week takes a lot of getting used to.
The unexpected weather made me think about other unexpected events in my life.
Jim's dementia was unexpected.
He was so young that it took more than a year before dementia was diagnosed.
Even after I learned everything I could about the disease, the change, though expected, was still unexpected.
It didn't seem possible that the man I knew could be consumed by a disease that erased memories and skills built over a lifetime.
Then, the expected outcome hit with unexpected emotions.
It didn't matter that I knew the disease was going to progress and take on a life of its own.
A point came when our world changed, we changed too.
We adapted and kept on going--taking one day at a time, or sometimes an hour at a time.
Life became the peaks and valleys of human nature.
Being a primary caregiver for someone with dementia is challenging.
Caregiving requires a talent for thinking on your feet, and developing an ability to expect the unexpected at all times.
There is no way to sugarcoat it and say that you will always be at the top of your game.
After all, the best caregiver in the world is only human.
Even good caregivers make mistakes, have regrets, and may suffer from serious doubts that they can do this job day after day, year after year.
Have you ever noticed that sometimes the most difficult days in our lives are the ones that define us?
When you face challenges and give it your best, you develop strength and self-assurance you will never get by running away.
When you look at the positive, and seek out small moments of joy, your life can take on a new purpose.
After the snow quit this morning, I walked out into the yard to have a look around.
As I looked back across the yard, I could see my footprints in the snow, wandering here and there, but clearly showing where I had been as I searched for the unexpected on this strange day in May.
Then, I spotted my lilacs, peeking out beneath a layer of glistening, pristine snow.
It was like finding a promise of better days ahead.
Copyright by L.S.
Fisher, May 2013 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, April 26, 2013>
David Hyde Pierce, who has been a champion for Alzheimer's began this year's forum by joking about how the word advocate in Spanish is abogado, which sounds like "avocado." It was his observation that "Avocadoes are like Alzheimer's advocates because they are irresistible, and they have big nuts." About Alzheimer's disease, David said, "It's not going to stop until we stop it." Then, the most unusual call to action I've heard in the thirteen forums I've attended, "Avacados, let's roll!" Of course, we all laughed at David Hyde Pierce's jokes because, let's face it, he knows how to deliver a punch line.
Jokes aside, just like us, he is here on a mission--flying back and forth from New York to take part in this forum.
Because, like the more than 900 advocates packed into the large ballroom, he has a personal stake in finding a cure for this disease.
He's met Alzheimer's and knows what a cruel disease it is.
The conference, as usual, was a whirlwind of activities.
Dr. Collins, director of NIH, announced that in a unique step, NIH has designated $40 million of its 2013 budget for Alzheimer's.
In addition, an indication of the nation's attention to the underfunded Alzheimer's research funds, the president's 2014 budget allocates $80 million to research.
My Mom and Glen Campbell Glen Campbell joined us for the National Alzheimer's Dinner.
He entered the room a few feet from me, but I couldn't get my camera turned on in time to get a picture.
After dinner, I managed to work my way to the front of the crowd to get a picture of him and my mom.
More important than the photo ops was the presentation of the Sargent and Eunice Shriver Profiles in Courage Award to Glen Campbell and his family.
The "Rhinestone Cowboy" strode to the stage and accepted his award with humility that belied his outer showmanship.
After several other deserving awards, the Outstanding Advocate of the Year Award was presented to Dr. Ron Grant who has early onset Alzheimer's.
He thanked God and the Oklahoma/Arkansas Chapter for giving him the courage to face the disease.
He said, "We live in the greatest nation on the planet, but I have to ask--in such a great nation, how many more families are going to have to suffer the devastation of this disease?" Grant concluded with a break in his voice, "How many more of us are going to have to die before we stand up and say enough?" That, I would say, is the most important question of the entire forum.
How many precious lives have been lost to the costliest disease in the United States?
Officially, 83,437 died from Alzheimer's in 2010.
Other health conditions are often listed as the cause of death although the reason for the condition is caused by Alzheimer's.
In 2013, an estimated 450,000 will die with Alzheimer's.
We ended the conference part of the forum armed with statistics and tactics, but the most important element of our visits to the hill would be the power of our personal stories.
As this abogado "avocado" prepared to charge the hill, I left the room with Dr. Grant's haunting question echoing in my brain, "how many?"  Copyright by L.S.
Fisher, April 2013 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 14, 2013>
April is a kaleidoscope month with beautiful patterns and disturbing images.
Rain and clouds bring sad thoughts.
Storms can light the skies and simultaneously startle us with heart stopping thunder, wind, hail, and tornadoes.
Along with spring comes a period of renewed hope when dazzling sunshine warms the ground and flowers, mushrooms, and foliage cover the earth with a lush blanket of beauty.
April is a month of memories for me.
It was on a hot day in April when Jim left his body behind and went to a place where he could be whole again.
April rain falls in my heart when I allow myself to remember those days of April when he was ready to leave, but I wasn't ready to let go.
Perhaps, in lieu of sad thoughts I've packed April with activities.
This month is full of conferences, meetings, and my annual trip to Washington DC to advocate for Alzheimer's.
Saturday, I drove to Kansas City for an inspirational breakfast and spent the morning with some amazing women.
We each introduced ourselves and talked about our first job and the most innovative thing in the workplace.
We shared laughter and memories of those jobs and discussed how far the business world has advanced over the years.
Was it the talk of old times that turned my thoughts to the past?
Or was it just that this is April?
The rush of memories expressed themselves with April rain flowing from my eyes and I made the decision to stop at the cemetery on my way home.
I pulled off the interstate when I saw the sign for the Missouri Veterans Cemetery at Higginsville.
I stopped at Walmart hoping to find some flowers and instead settled for a colorful plant in a pot decorated with two birds facing each other.
As I left Walmart, I drove through McDonald's and bought a cheeseburger and fries.
A few miles out of town, I pulled through the gate into the cemetery and drove to the columbarium.
I had the peaceful, quiet cemetery all to myself.
I shared my water with the plant and placed it beneath Jim's memorial.
I sat on a bench and ate my lunch while I reflected on our life together.
Jim would have looked forward to my impending retirement and trips to see family and friends.
He would have wanted to spend time animal watching in the Rocky Mountains he grew to love so much.
He would have been so proud of our children and grandchildren.
He would have loved showing the grandkids his childhood places and sharing his stories and memories.
That was what made Jim, Jim.
We would have spent time having those soul-searching conversations about life, death, and the time between.
Time.
We ran out of it.
I sat on the bench reminiscing when I heard a sound behind me, breaking the silence.
I turned to see...nothing but the committal shelter, with the flags flying high in front of it.
I heard the noise again and realized it was the flags flapping in the breeze.
Jim's physical presence has been gone for eight years.
Not a day goes by without thoughts of Jim.
He is imprinted on my heart where he'll always share a part of my being.
Was he perfect?
No.
But in many ways, he was perfect for me, and we seemed to complete each other.
After my time alone with Jim and our memories, I drove away.
The tears vanished, and I thought about how fortunate my life has been.
I've learned to be independent and comfortable in my skin.
Loneliness and sadness visit only occasionally--as unexpected and quick as the lightening of an April storm.
I have lived a full and rich life that began on a December day in Hawaii when I married Jim.
Our time together began on an April day when he returned from Vietnam and ended on another April day thirty-five years later.
Our time together ended, but life goes on for me.
I plan to enjoy many years of fun, laughter, and joy.
Family and friends are the essence of life, and they provide circles of love without beginning or end.
Copyright (c) April 2013 by L.S.
Fisher Earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 6, 2013>
At Easter services, we enjoyed a parade of banners bearing different names for Jesus.
If you think about it, many names are used in the Bible...Lord, Redeemer, Savior, Christ, The Word, Alpha and Omega...just to name a few.
During the sermon, Pastor Jim mentioned that according to the census, the most common women's names are Mary, Patricia, and Linda.
I really didn't need the census to know Linda is a common name, especially for those of us born in the Fifties and early Sixties.
I went to a small school and throughout all my school years, our class had five girls named Linda.
One year, to avoid confusion, the teacher called all five of us by our middle names.
"Why did you name me Linda?" I asked my mom.
"Because it's such a beautiful name, and I never knew anyone named Linda," she said.
Well, there must have been a lot of mommas with the same mindset.
If there was one thing I hated worse than my first name, it was my middle name.
That probably came from my brothers making fun of my middle name, Sue, since it sounded similar to how the hogs were called.
I'm not kidding about that.
I have a friend that I've known for forty years that calls me Linda Lou.
The funny thing is that I'm positive he really thinks that is my name.
I've never told him any different, and now his wife calls me Linda Lou.
"Why didn't you name me Ellen?" I asked my mom--many, many times.
I wouldn't have even minded Linda Ellen because I would have used my middle name for sure.
My mom and grandmother shared the middle name Ellen, and I loved that name.
I envied that name.
Neither of them used it anymore than I used my middle name.
They say a rose by any other name would smell just as sweet, but when it comes to human nature, our names can have an effect on our lives.
Johnny Cash sang a song about a "Boy named Sue" and the hardships that created on a boy growing up with a girl's name.
Of course, his dad name him Sue so that he would grow up tough.
And, at least in the song, the name choice made a difference.
Some people's names are immortalized when a disease is named after them, including several that affect the brain.
Alzheimer's is named after Alois Alzheimer who discovered the plaques and tangles that are the hallmarks of the disease.
Another dementia, Pick's disease is named after Arnold Pick, a professor of psychiatry from Prague, who first described the disease.
Lewy Body dementia is named after a German scientist Friederich Lewy, who studied at the Alois Alzheimer's laboratory in Munich.
Hans Creutzfieldt and Alfons Jakob studied at the same laboratory during the time Pick was there.
They, of course, were the first to describe Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, which is so hard to pronounce that it is known as CJD or "mad cow disease." Down's syndrome is named after John Landon Down.
About 25% or more of individuals with Down's syndrome will develop Alzheimer's after the age of thirty-five.
Most of us will never have anything named after us, other than maybe our descendents.
You never hear of any babies named Linda anymore.
In fact, if you wanted a girl born this year to have a name different from her classmates, you would be safe with Linda.
I'm thinking that by the time we have great-grandchildren the name will make a comeback.
It will be such an old name that it will come back in style.
My name was common, and I didn't have to worry about people misspelling or mispronouncing it.
When you see some of the unusual names, with unusual spellings, pronunciation can have your tongue turned upside down.
What does that do to a person's psyche to have their name pronounced wrong by every stranger they meet?
What about people who have names so silly that they are taunted by other children?
Sometimes you wonder what people were thinking when they named a defenseless child something so ridiculous.
Names of places, people, and things can immediately create mental images in our minds.
Whether a name is unusual or common, it identifies you to those who know you.
When your family and friends hear your name, they immediately make a connection to the unique and special person you are.
Copyright April 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 25, 2013>
I've always been a dreamer and often awaken in the night puzzling over what remote area of my brain produced those mini-motion pictures.
My dreams are often a mystery, especially when I wake up with vivid images of my nighttime adventures.
We all dream, but some people cannot remember their dreams when they awaken.
I tend to remember mine and find myself inspired, disturbed, or downright puzzled.
I kept a dream journal for a long time as a means to jumpstart my writing.
I am amazed at how many ideas I can glean from my dreams.
Just a few of the images I remember from last night: (1) I dreamed my house was connected to my work and a former employee had removed my cat's litter box and let her outside.
(2) I had gone to the dentist (whose office was at a mall) and forgot to remove the clothing protector when I left, but managed to accidentally put on two fancy scarves that didn't belong to me.
(3) My sister and I hopped on a trolley to return to the mall to get my coat and return the scarves.
Does any of that make sense?
In a strange way, most of it does relate vaguely to something that happened the day before.
Think about Dorothy and the Wizard of Oz.
Her dream from the bump to her head was a fascinating distortion of the events leading up to the tornado.
Did you know that studies before 1950 showed that most people dreamed in black and white?
That began to change during the sixties, and now about eighty-eight percent of us dream in color.
Nearly ninety-six percent younger than twenty-five dream in color.
This change is believed to be the result of the changeover from black and white film to color media.
It really makes sense if you think about it.
One of the theories behind dreaming is that dreams are our way of consolidating our memories and attempting to make sense of them.
We dream during the REM (rapid eye movement) stage.
While our eyes move, normally, the rest of our body is paralyzed.
In our family, several of us have, or have had, paralyzing nightmares.
During this event, we are trying to wake from a bad dream and realize that although the mind is awake, the body cannot move.
It is a disconcerting feeling, to say the least.
On CBS This Morning, Dr. James Galvin talked about a study from Mayo Clinic about dreams and the connection to dementia.
This study showed that if you act out your dreams by kicking, shouting, punching, or thrashing about, you are at higher risk of developing dementia.
In fact, the study shows this is the strongest predictor of developing Lewy Body disease.
Approximately 1.3 million people in the United States have Lewy Body disease.
Both men and women develop the disease, but it is more common in men.
Lewy Body disease is under diagnosed because of symptoms it shares with Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, but subtle differences help physicians make a diagnosis.
Now, added to other differences, acting out dreams may be another indicator of the disease.
Lewy Body disease is best treated with a comprehensive approach by a team of specialists.
Cholinesterase inhibitors, such as Aricept, work well on Lewy Body disease.
In fact, it is believed the cholinesterase inhibitors are more effective on this disease than on Alzheimer's.
The movement disorders associated with Lewy Body is treated with Parkinson's medication.
Antipsychotic drugs should not be used for hallucinations because they react differently on persons with Lewy Body disease.
These drugs worsen symptoms in fifty percent of those using them, and can cause a fatal reaction called neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS).
Of course, one of the problems with Lewy Body disease is REM Sleep Behavior Disorder.
This is often treated with melatonin or clonazepam.
It is important to remember that if you move around and act out your dreams, it does not mean that you have Lewy Body disease or that you will develop it.
If you develop signs of dementia, it is something to mention to your team of physicians during testing to determine the cause of your cognitive problems.
The connection between sleep and function the following day is strong.
A lack of sleep or disturbed sleep affects our thinking process.
Now, acting out during sleep means a person is five times more likely to develop Lewy Body dementia than those who sleep quietly during dreams.
Sleep is essential to our health and wellbeing.
The REM stage of sleep is when our minds can take us places we will only reach through dreams.
Copyright (c) 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com    
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 9, 2013>
Tonight, or should I say early tomorrow morning, is the time to set our clocks for daylight saving time.
We know which direction to change the clock by reminding each other to "spring forward." So, I don't have a problem with springing forward, but changing time, doesn't work for me.
But then, I don't have any choice in the matter.
I can't continue using standard time when the rest of the country sets their clocks forward.
Heck, it's hard enough for me to be on time under the best of circumstances.
When the time changes, it takes weeks before my biological clock gets back in sinc with the clock on the wall.
Anytime I travel to a different time zone, I go through this big mental adjustment.
Whether I travel east or west doesn't seem to make much difference.
Either one will throw me for a loop, either while I'm there or when I get home.
One year, I carefully entered a schedule into my cell phone for the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum in Washington DC.
I'm probably the only person who ever went to that much trouble, just to realize that I somehow managed to have the schedule set to Central time and every event I had painstakingly entered did not switch to the new time zone.
Sure, the phone changed, but the entries did not change with it.
It seems that as I get older, I've reverted to questioning things--like daylight saving time.
The first thing I found when I Googled the time change was that it is not "daylight savings time," it is "daylight saving time." In all honesty, we have the exact same number of daylight hours no matter what time the clock says.
The whole idea is to rearrange time to suit our lifestyle, not to save any time whatsoever.
Rearranging time is, of course, the biggest advantage.
The downside is that it messes up some of us for days, if not weeks.
On the Monday following the time change, more auto accidents occur.
Work productivity suffers.
I remember many years ago when I worked at a different job, we noticed one employee did not show up to work the day after the time change.
One of my co-workers called him.
"What cha doin'?" he asked.
"Drinking coffee," the missing employee replied, "like I always do this time of day." Boy, was he ever surprised to find out he was sitting there drinking coffee when he was expected to be at work.
Regardless of the extra daylight hours at the end of the workday, I always feel like an hour of my life has gone missing.
It usually means an hour less of sleep for me since I can't seem to go to bed early enough to get a full night's sleep under the best circumstances.
It so happens that the older I get, the harder it is to make any fast moves and springing sounds like it could be beyond my speed.
So, if springing is too hard, we could simply move forward.
Each year we can move forward just a little slower.
Technically, it is not yet spring although the rain last night and the sound of dripping snow were hopeful signs of impending spring weather.
All I know is that this is one year that proved that silly groundhog was wrong in his prediction--really, really wrong.
Before long, it will be officially springtime.
Maybe by then, I'll forgive Puxsutawney Phil for his faux pas.
By summer, I'll have adjusted to the time change and can enjoy the extra hour of evening daylight, which is after all the advantage of daylight saving time.
Copyright (c) March 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 2, 2013>
I tend to be a worrywart and when I heard the predictions last Monday, it was all I could do to keep from freaking out.
We had just weathered a storm that dumped a foot of snow on us and then the models were calling for another six to twenty-two inches with thirty-mile-an-hour winds.
I kept telling myself they could be wrong.
No amount of self-reassurance could keep me from worrying.
I was awake more than asleep on Monday night as the storm raged.
My cell phone said "light snow" but the wind-driven snow was anything but light.
By morning, I knew I'd be foolish to head out to work in the storm.
Monday evening, we arranged to have some of the office staff picked up and taken to work.
It was a good thing because we had major power outages at the electric cooperative where I work.
I was able to make some phone calls from home to help a little, but the brunt of the work fell on other staff, and, of course, the linemen who braved the blizzard to restore power to the people sitting in cold, dark homes.
As the storm named Rocky raged on, we became more aware of the damage.
Nearly two-thirds of our system was in the dark.
I made it to work on Wednesday, and the rest of the week was a blur of calls and stories of how people coped without power--some of them for four days.
The calls ranged from one extreme to the other--pleasant understanding to unbridled anger.
The longer the outage lasted, the more exhausted our employees were and the more frustrated the members became.
Many conversations stuck with me, but I think the one that hit home the hardest was the lady talking about an elderly couple who were staying in town.
They wanted to go home.
She said, "He has serious health problems and didn't bring enough medication.
She gets so upset when things don't go right.
You know how people can get." "I certainly do," I said.
"I'm the same way.
When something doesn't go right, I get upset." The tension was broken as we had a laugh about human nature.
Throughout the week, I thought of the message Pastor Jim gave on Sunday.
He said fear has many names and one of them is worry.
I'm not sure where he got the statistics he quoted, but they made perfect sense to me.
Jim Downing said that forty percent of what we worry about never happens.
I would say looking back at what I worry about, that's probably a little low for me.
But then, I'm a worrywart so it stands to reason that my personal fruitless worrying would be higher than average.
Thirty percent of worrying is about the past and can't be changed.
I saw an example of that when one of the employees asked me if she could take off next Monday.
She needed to watch her grandchild, but she was afraid that she would be needed at work.
I put it on the calendar and told her, "Sometimes family just has to come first.
It took me a long time to realize that and I missed a lot of events because I put work first." With tears in her eyes, she relayed a story of when she put work first and had never stopped regretting it.
Twelve percent is over criticism.
I used to get my feelings hurt easily, but I outgrew that.
I think to overcome worry about what others think of me, I've acknowledged that I'm not perfect and some people cannot be satisfied.
I can't do much about those who criticize me, but I can either use the criticism to improve myself, or if it's unwarranted, let it die.
I learned a lot about criticism this week.
Ten percent of worry is over health--yours or a loved one's.
I think we worry more about our loved ones that ourselves.
One time I needed surgery and Jim kept insisting I tell my mother.
I wanted to tell her when it was over.
He couldn't handle the stress on his own and he called her!
I know that Jim's dementia worried me more than it did him.
Eight percent of our worries are about real problems.
Sometimes, worry can be a positive thing because we prepare ourselves.
Some of those who worried about the storm used their concern as a springboard to prepare.
They arranged a place to stay; they fired up generators or wood stoves.
They became ingenious and went into survivor mode.
Sure, they were as inconvenienced as anyone else, but they found a way to make the best of a bad situation.
One woman fired up her grill to melt snow water to flush her toilet.
I wish I could say knowing the statistics means I'm now worry free, but it doesn't.
As long as snowstorms are wicked enough to have names, many of us will worry.
Action does help alleviate some of the worry, along with faith and trust in a higher power.
Copyright (c) by L.S.
Fisher, March 2013 www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 23, 2013>
We knew the storm was coming and needed to plan accordingly.
Although the amount of snow on the ground was deceptively light at 6:40 a.m., the time I usually leave for work, the forecast warned that this was just the beginning of a long day.
I stayed home deciding I'd rather be snowed in than out.
Having been caught in both situations, on my last year in the working world, I have no desire to put my car in a ditch.
I do believe the nearly foot of snow was more than expected.
The snow fell at about an inch an hour, and to make it more interesting thunder rumbled.
The thundersnow fell, fell, and fell.
I started measuring with a ruler and the last time I sank it into the ground, a mere inch showed.
Then it started sleeting.
The intense snowfall brought the world to a screeching halt as banks, shopping centers, restaurants, and other businesses sent employees home.
Interstates and airports closed.
So many cars were stranded that in Kansas City, they towed them off by the hundreds in order to clear the highways.
Thundersnow is rare, and a little bit weird.
In a normal thunderstorm with rain, thunder can be heard for many miles from where the lightning strikes.
Snow acts as an acoustic suppresser and the sound of thunder can only be heard for two to three miles.
When we wake up each morning, we expect the usual, and we can be caught off guard when the unusual happens.
The unexpected can strike at any point in time.
It can come in the form of a phone call, a text message, a medical test, a bulletin on TV, or a knock on the door.
Hundreds of mundane days can be shattered with one nanosecond of the unusual.
We can often chunk our lives into sections based on moments when our world tilted and never quite righted itself.
One of those times in my life was when the doctor told us Jim had "dementia of the Alzheimer's type."  When you hear news like that, your ears start to buzz, as if they can't bear to hear the unexpected information.
Your heart quickens, and you stop breathing as your brain echoes with the words it refuses to process.
Denial, hope, and despair wage a battle to see which one can get the upper hand.
Jim always said, "I don't have that." He preferred to think the psychiatrist was inept.
It turned out that Jim had a rare type of dementia.
It wasn't Alzheimer's, but it was just as bad, with the same inevitable outcome.
Not a day passes in this world without someone struggling to live through an impossible situation.
Globally, 156,000 people die each day.
That is a lot of grief to go around.
In order to live a happy, normal life, we often harden ourselves to suffering if it does not affect us personally.
On the flip side of the death card, we celebrate the births of 350,000 babies each day.
Of course, some people have more cause to celebrate births than others do.
Babies born into poverty, although loved, may be a worry to his or her parents who struggle to provide basic food and shelter.
Through the joy, every parent is afraid that something will go wrong.
Our instinct is to protect our children from the cruelties of the world, but that is a goal set up to fail.
Too little protection puts them in danger, too much can make them vulnerable.
Births and deaths while unusual in our personal lives are daily occurrences when we look outside ourselves.
What does the future hold?
No one knows.
The future is both as unpredictable and predictable as the weather.
Weather is never an exact science.
Yes, sometimes we can be warned of the possibilities, or probabilities, but what will really happen can be a different story.
This morning I saw two opposing predictions for the storm expected on Sunday.
We can have another ten inches of snow, or a thunderstorm with rain.
In either case, it is expected to come in the night, so it's anyone's guess as to what Monday will bring.
Will it be a normal workday, or another weird day with thundersnow?
Copyright February 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 15, 2013>
I'm a baby boomer and I know just how old we are getting.
This year I plan to retire and hope to have time, finally, to enjoy all the activities I've had to put on the back burner or reserve for a few weeks of vacation.
What I don't want in my future is to be brought down by Alzheimer's as we know it today.
Alzheimer's disease would rob me of my memories, my skills, and effectively end life as I know it.
I want to remain active throughout my old age and still have the ability to enjoy life thoroughly.
I want to be like my mother!
We are nearing the crossroads with Alzheimer's as we baby boomers age.
Left unchecked, 13.8 million of us can look forward to developing Alzheimer's disease.
I don't think there are thirteen of us who want this future, much less 13.8 million.
Why is this important to us?
We all want to think that we will be one of the lucky ones without Alzheimer's in our future.
The biggest problem is we are not investing in preventing Alzheimer's.
We seem to be sitting on our butts instead of doing something about Alzheimer's now.
Do you know how much this country invests in Alzheimer's research?
Last year the National Institutes of Health invested $606 million in Alzheimer's research.
That seems like a lot of money, doesn't it?
In fact, for Alzheimer's it was the first time research funding from NIH exceeded $500 million.
Should we be doing a happy dance?
Not so fast.
How much will it take to find a cure for Alzheimer's?
Just to give it some perspective--NIH spends $6 billion a year on cancer, and $3 billion for HIV/AIDS.
I know we have a budgetary crisis, and I really think we need to do something about it.
In 2012, the cost of Alzheimer's care totaled $200 billion, including Medicare and Medicaid payments of $140 billion.
The cost of Alzheimer's care is expected to increase 500% to $1.1 trillion by 2050 as we baby boomers age.
Think about these staggering numbers for just a moment.
I'll admit that I have trouble wrapping my head around numbers that start with a "b," much less a "t".
If you look at Alzheimer's from strictly a financial viewpoint, you have to admit that something has to be done.
The only logical way to stop this impending financial disaster is to find a cure, or at least treatment that will halt the disease before it destroys independent living.
Are we ever going to accomplish this goal without investing in research?
That is a question we need to ask our legislators, and it is one we do ask each year during our Capitol Hill visits following the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum.
For a moment, let's put all talk of financial considerations aside.
The bottom line in this entire argument is the emotional impact on those diagnosed with dementia and their families.
Alzheimer's is a life-changing event from which there is no turning back.
It takes strength and determination to continue with quality life for persons with the disease, their family, and friends.
Though my volunteer work with the Alzheimer's Association, I've met many people with Alzheimer's and caregivers who manage this devastating diagnosis with dignity and courage.
They have allowed news media into their homes to bring awareness.
They don purple sashes, talk to their legislators about the disease, and leave a sense of urgency in their wake.
Advocates with the disease give a face to the 5.4 million Americans who are living with Alzheimer's right now, right here, in the United States.
So when we talk about the future of Alzheimer's, we need to push, and push hard, for a cure, not palliative care for 5.4 million people today or 13.8 million in 2050.
Each life disrupted by Alzheimer's is one too many.
Our loved ones are not statistics--they are human beings with families that love them and memories far too precious to lose.
Copyright (c) February 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 10, 2013>
For the past two days, I've been fighting the paper war and though I've won a couple of minor skirmishes, I cannot say that I'm anywhere close to winning.
It seems that I have bags, boxes, storage tubs, file cabinets and various temporary containers chocked full of paperwork.
I'll be the first to admit that I get totally aggravated with myself when I can't find an important piece of paper.
When I'm being good, I file things away, or at least put common papers in their designated spot.
On most days, I throw my mail on the end table and may or may not look at it, much less sort it.
Considering how hectic my life is, it makes perfect sense that I work in organized chaos most of the time.
I put one project aside to work on another with a shorter deadline.
I shuffle bags containing my writing group, Alzheimer's council, Walk to End Alzheimer's, Sedalia Business Women, Business Women of Missouri, and writing projects.
Sometimes, I feel like throwing everything in the air and working on it randomly.
Yesterday, I tackled some of the various boxes marked "go through" which means I got tired of looking at the paper, didn't have time to sort it, and just gave up and boxed it.
So tackling one of those boxes has to be on a day when I don't have anything else to do...or not.
That day hasn't happened yet, so I just decided to take a slice of time from pending deadlines to look at the waste products from past projects.
I sorted into two piles--keep and throw away.
After a while, I became more hardened to what I felt like I could just toss.
I threw away memories along with many of my creative efforts.
When in doubt, I figured many of the papers were stored on a thumb drive somewhere.
Tossing, sorting, and examining documents was going quite well until I came across Jim's Safe Return application.
Then, the world seemed to stand still for just a moment as I recalled filling out the form.
That piece of paper was a reality check.
If Jim wandered off, he could become lost and need help to be reunited with us.
The part of the document that brought me to tears was the location of his tattoos.
I knew one was on his left wrist because he covered it with his watch, one was on his thumb, and another on his shoulder.
For some reason, I had trouble remembering just which shoulder was tattooed with his name.
I could always picture the tattoo in my mind's eye: "Jim" obviously a homemade tattoo.
It looked like a prison tat, but in Jim's case, his cousin Joe did the honors when they were young.
When I first met Jim, I didn't believe he owned a shirt without the sleeves ripped off it.
So I saw the tattoo the day I met him, and nearly every day of our marriage.
So why did I have this mental glitch about which shoulder?
While fighting the paper war, I found a document that confirmed the tattoo was on his right shoulder.
Of course, it was!
I'm sure I knew that all along.
Some memories are painful, but I'm thankful that I have them.
With all the millions of memories running through 100 billion connectors in my brain, it is no wonder that some of them are hard to find.
It might take something to jog that memory and bring it to the forefront.
At least that's my story and I'm sticking to it.
With the discovery of the Safe Return application, I decided the paper war was best left on hold for me to return and fight another day.
It only goes to show that among all the worthless pieces of paper we hang onto, sometimes a gem exists among them that freshens a memory from a different time and place.
Copyright (c) February 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 1, 2013>
L.S.
Fisher, Alzheimer's Advocate There are two kinds of people when it comes to health issues--those who want to know everything and those who want to know nothing.
One group falls into the category of die-hard realists and the other is filled with those in denial.
There aren't any simple answers when it comes to health.
A visit to a physician can make or break your day, and sometimes your spirit, depending on how he presents your health issues.
But even more important is how you interpret the diagnosis you are given.
Getting an Alzheimer's diagnosis is a long and arduous process.
An entire battery of tests, scans, and evaluations are used to determine if you might have a treatable condition.
Once other conditions--thyroid, drug interaction, vitamin deficiencies, too much calcium--are ruled out, your physician may give you a diagnosis of Alzheimer's.
Hundreds of other related dementias exist besides Alzheimer's.
Since Alzheimer's is the most common cause of dementia, it is the usual diagnosis.
As the disease progresses, the type of dementia may become more evident as frontotemporal dementia, Lewy body disease, vascular or other common dementias.
Some conditions can be determined by genetic testing--familial early onset Alzheimer's or Huntington's, for example.
For millions, the exact cause of dementia remains unknown or is determined by autopsy.
We chose autopsy to get an exact cause of Jim's dementia, which turned out to be corticobasal degeneration.
Since Jim was diagnosed with Alzheimer's, and not too many people know what corticobasal degeneration is, it is easier to say he had an Alzheimer's type of dementia.
Currently, in the news is a discussion about a drug that allows a PET scan to detect Alzheimer's plaques.
The controversy is whether Medicare should pay for the $3,000 test.
Opponents to the test say that it won't help.
I was floored to see the quote in the national article was from a physician in my hometown.
The quote: "There's never been a study that asked whether patients do better as a result of florbetapir testing," said David Kuhlmann, a neurologist at Bothwell Regional Health Center in Sedalia, Missouri.
Okay, we all know there is no cure for Alzheimer's and treatment is for symptoms only.
Because of the bleak prognosis, no one seems to see a need for an accurate diagnosis.
But early diagnosis is crucial in irreversible dementia for several reasons.
First, it is important for a person with dementia to make important life decisions while they still can.
Jim and I both signed advance directives, durable power of attorneys, and wills.
Had we owned more, estate planning would have been even more important.
Second, treatments are more effective in the early stages of the disease.
Putting aside all reasons for a diagnosis, and how it could actually help, there is the matter of cost, and Medicare needs to avoid unnecessary expense.
So, this test costs $3,000.
Expensive enough, I'd say.
I'm going to throw out a ballpark figure of $20,000 to complete all the testing to attempt to rule out Alzheimer's.
In our case, most of that was paid through private insurance, and out of pocket, rather than Medicare.
Once we ruled out other conditions that could cause reversible dementia, we purchased expensive drugs that had no effect whatsoever on Jim, other than side-effects, because he didn't have amyloid plaques.
Of course, we didn't know that until after he died.
A $3,000 PET scan to find out his dementia was not Alzheimer's, as diagnosed, could have saved many more thousands on drugs and costly emergency room visits.
I can think of a lot of scary diagnoses and can narrow down the ones that would make me take stock and reevaluate my entire life and lifestyle.
Alzheimer's type of dementia, cancer, and heart disease would be at the top of the list.
I would only hope that if I were ever diagnosed with any of those three, I would be a realist and want to know every treatment available and evaluate my options to have the best life possible.
I'll admit that Alzheimer's, or any related dementia, scares me the most.
I've seen it, felt it, and breathed it throughout Jim's journey.
Through my volunteer and advocacy work, I've met many people with Alzheimer's and their caregivers who face the diagnosis with grace and unbelievable courage.
An Alzheimer's diagnosis affects not only your body, but your skills, communication, and a lifetime of memories that connect you to your loved ones.
Have you ever thought about how empty you would feel without memories?
Isn't it important to know what is wrong with our health, so we can either make it right, or at least do what we can?
Copyright (c) L.S.
Fisher, February 2013 www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 27, 2013>
In Memory of Jim Being a caregiver to a loved one who has dementia isn't a job that anyone wants, and yet 15 million Americans fill those unpaid positions.
This army of caregivers is made up of various friends and relatives who battle the around-the-clock attention that a person with dementia requires.
The Alzheimer's journey is a long and complex route.
It begins with small lapses and glitches that can be overlooked or explained away.
It is easy to be in denial that something major is going on, and you just tend to muddle through each day as it comes.
By the time, the symptoms become more obvious, you go through an entire battery of tests to rule out any diseases that can be treated.
As in any diagnostic process, you will go through highs and lows.
Some physicians will analyze the tests results and give you different answers.
One might say, "It's low blood sugar and as soon as you treat that, the symptoms will go away." Another might say, "Get your affairs in order while you still can." Throughout the early diagnostic process, the caregiver shares the anxiety, the fear, and the loss with a loved one.
Later in the disease, the caregiver bears those anxieties alone.
When your loved one has Alzheimer's or other related dementia, caregiving becomes an all- consuming responsibility.
If your parent has Alzheimer's, you find that your roles have reversed and you feel like the parent.
If it is your spouse, you miss the special bond you had and find your love changing from a reciprocal relationship to one where you expect nothing in return.
Most people look at a caregiver and think he or she is a person who feeds, bathes, toilets, and watches over the person with dementia.
They see the physical side of caregiving as the overwhelming responsibility.
They see a caregiver who looks exhausted from the physical demands and lack of sleep.
They may even understand the mental strain of trying to keep a loved one safe: taking car keys away from someone who has driven for many years or installing special locks or alarms to keep them from wandering away and getting lost.
What the outsider cannot see is the pain and stress that threatens to overwhelm the caregiver's soul.
They cannot see the inch-by-inch losses that make each day a new challenge.
They cannot see the inner strength that keeps the caregiver going against all odds.
By this point, the caregiver knows that there is no cure, no effective treatment, and no hope of survival for her loved one.
The outsider may wonder, why bother?
It's a losing battle.
These are the same people who won't go to visit because, "He doesn't know who I am and won't remember if I've been there." Hogwash!
People with dementia might not be able to say your name or even recognize you, but they know when someone cares enough to spend time with them, bring them a milkshake, give them a hug, or even make them laugh.
No, they don't need anyone visiting who is going to resent spending time with them or who upsets them.
Someone who cares enough to learn how to communicate with a person who has dementia is always a welcome visitor.
After Jim's disease progressed and I couldn't provide the kind of care he needed at home, people used to ask if Jim knew who I was.
Jim was silent the last few years of his life, so I wasn't sure whether he remembered my name or that I was his wife.
It actually became irrelevant.
What he did know was that I came to see him every day and that I loved him.
It wasn't important that he remembered me, but that I, and the rest of our family, never forgot him.
Studies show that the hardest part of being a caregiver is grief.
A caregiver's grief is insidious, sneaking up and attacking unexpectedly.
For a caregiver to remain healthy, he or she needs to find solace in the fact that the person with dementia is taken care of physically and showered with love.
Caregiving with love isn't what you do, it is who you are.
You owe it to yourself, and to your loved one, to keep the faith that live is good, but some of us have bumpier roads for our journey.
To vote for Early Onset Alzheimer's blog in the Healthline best health blog CLICK HERE TO  GO TO THE VOTING SITE.
You can vote once a day via Facebook or Twitter.
Contest ends February 15, 2013.
Early Onset is the only Alzheimer's blog in the top 10.
All votes appreciated.
Copyright (c) January 2013 by L.S.
Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 24, 2013>
Sometimes with our busy lives, it is hard to remember all the tasks we have to complete in a day.
Personally, I have so many calendars that one of my major challenges is to remember where I wrote the latest appointment or event.
Even my cell phone has a calendar, Quick Office, One Note, and a Task list.
Still, I can manage to forget things big and small, important or trivial, must do or wishy-washy.
I can understand how people forget to vote for Early Onset Alzheimer's blog in the Healthline contest.
The contest began December 21 and runs until February 13.
I got a late start since I never saw the email until the contest was well underway.
We rose rapidly through the ranks and I was thrilled to make it to the top ten since it's easier for people to find you on the first page.
The blog skyrocketed to 2nd place and we stayed there for quite a while.
Then, other blogs started getting hundreds of votes each day and we've dropped to 3rd.
A lot of people voted one time and thought they were finished.
Others kept forgetting to vote or couldn't find the link to vote when they remembered.
Some of my family and friends tried to vote on their phones and just couldn't get them to work Early Onset Alzheimer's blog has more than 100 visitors each day.
I realize that some of you are already voting, but a lot aren't.
Voting has to be done via Facebook or Twitter and many of you don't use either.
If you want to vote, and don't have a Facebook account and don't want to open one, you can easily open a Twitter account.
All you need is an email address.
Just go to www.Twitter.com and you can open an account in a matter of minutes.
You can go to the contest link and vote.
Who knows you may even have some fun with it!
Consider this your friendly Friday reminder to vote for the only Alzheimer's blog in the top ten!
To make it really easy for you to vote, just CLICK HERE to go to the contest voting site.
Once you are there, click the "Vote Now" button following Early Onset Alzheimer's blog.
Then, a few things might happen.
It might ask you to sign into Facebook or Twitter again and if you are already signed in you can just X out of that.
You may be asked to choose Facebook or Twitter.
You may have to scroll around on the screen to find the different options.
Then, it will ask you if you want to post to your timeline.
You can type in a message and post to your timeline to encourage others to vote.
You will get a message that says, "Thank you for voting" and you are done.
You can vote once a day, and your vote is greatly appreciated!
copyright (c) January 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 19, 2013>
When I first met Jim, he was twenty-two years old, played a guitar, and sang country songs.
He heavily favored Buck Owens, Merle Haggard, George Jones, and other old time country greats.
Jim had a knack for hearing a song once and being able to sing it perfectly.
It never ceased to amaze me that he could learn lyrics so effortlessly.
In the eighties, we began to take annual vacations to the Rockies.
One day we walked into a shop in Estes Park where they were playing a version of "Happy Trails" that obviously was not Roy Rodgers and Dale Evans.
"Who is singing that song?" Jim asked the owner of the shop.
"That's Michael Martin Murphey," she said.
It was love at first sound for Jim, and Michael Martin Murphey became his favorite singer.
His repertoire now included "Ghost Riders in the Sky," "Tumbling Tumbleweeds," and other cowboy songs.
One day, he started singing an obscure song, "I Ain't Had a Good Day" about a cowboy whose day was so bad he was ready to shoot anyone who got in his way and then kick dirt on them.
After dementia robbed Jim of the lyrics to many songs, he could remember that one.
Yesterday, I thought about this song.
I had a frustrating day at work and on my lunch hour, I checked on the Healthline contest and was dismayed to see that my blog had dropped from second to third.
Although my voters rallied, we kept losing ground.
Since Early Onset Alzheimer's blog had been in second for quite some time, I kept noticing my voters voting for the second place blog...which was a different one than they intended.
The day wore on, just getting worse on all fronts.
I was about to the meltdown point when the workday ended.
I was the last one out the door and saw the day's mail still on the shelf.
I thought I had time to take it to the post office and still make it to my granddaughter's basketball game.
Okay, had I not taken the mail, I wouldn't have been on Broadway at all.
I left the post office, fastened my seatbelt, drove the correct direction on the one-way street, stopped at all stop signs, signaled my turns even when no one was around, stopped at the light and made a right turn onto Broadway driving the speed limit.
Obeying each and every law as far as I could tell.
So why did the city police officer turn on his lights?
Yep.
He must mean me, so I found a side street and pulled over.
"Ma'am, you were driving on the white line," he said.
I must have had a blank look on my face because he said, "The one on the right side of the street." Okay.
As I dug out my driver's license and insurance card, I told him, "I've not been having a good day." And now, it just went from bad to worse.
Getting stopped for driving on my side of the road, what's up with that?
Was he afraid I was going to mess up the paint job?
If they had those little rumble strips, I'd have known I was touching the white line.
"I'm going to accept this insurance card although it's expired." This whole insurance card thing annoys me.
They can check everything else with your driver's license, why can't they put insurance info on their computers?
I've had insurance with the same company, without a single lapse, for the past forty years.
So why do I have to keep changing those cards?
After the delay, no ticket, I made it to the ballgame on time.
All parking lots were jam-packed.
I found a back parking lot, which not only was full, a truck was blocking the road out of the lot.
Now, he deserved a ticket!
I was able to drive off the pavement to get out of the lot.
My first break of the day happened then as someone backed out of a parking place.
Once I was inside the gym, I found my son and daughter-in-law.
I couldn't help but repeat the words Jim so often sang and greeted them with, "I'm telling you friends, I ain't had a good day." And, I sincerely meant it.
Copyright (c) January 2013 by L. S. Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 17, 2013>
I grew up during the cold war era, and it wasn't unusual to be watching TV and see a test pattern pop up on the screen and hear a shrill tone scream an alarm.
When I was a kid, my heart would thud in my chest if I heard the tone without the preamble, "This is a test of the Emergency Broadcast System." I always felt relieved when at the end the words, "This is only a test" were repeated.
Eventually, the rules changed, and the EBS was used to warn of impending natural disasters, and in our area, that would be tornadoes.
I didn't get the memo about the new use for the notification system.
The first time I heard, "We interrupt this broadcast," followed with a tone that could make a dog howl, I spent thirty long seconds imagining we were going to be a nation of crispy critters as soon as the nuclear mushroom cloud radiated us.
I was one darned happy kid to find out it was merely a tornado in a different county.
Of course, tests later caused a different kind of anxiety.
I always over-studied the material to make a good grade on tests.
I hated to miss any questions and a B just wasn't an acceptable grade.
The problem I found with knowing the material so well is that sometimes I would miss a question because of a nuance that made the answer technically incorrect.
It seems that other kids just skimmed the surface and marked it, but I would know that part of the answer was wrong.
Not long ago, my daughter-in-law and I were discussing the answers to a quiz, and I discovered that she was a lot like me when it came to analyzing multiple-choice answers.
We tried to figure out why a teacher would give two answers that could technically be right, but expect the student to decipher which answer she expected.
One question had to do with what you would say to a new mother who had cut down on cigarettes.
One answer was to tell her "It is good you cut down, but you are probably still getting nicotine." Because of the word "probably," we knew that had to be the wrong answer.
Wrong!
That was the teacher's choice.
Now, most of the tests I have are medical tests and you can't study for those.
It seems that the older I get, the more determined physicians are that they can surely to goodness find something wrong with me.
By the time they poke and prod, take a few vials of blood, and run tubes with little camera down my throat or up my ahem, I don't stand a chance.
Sure enough, they always find something.
What happened to the days when I felt pretty darned good and was blissfully unaware that things were falling apart on the inside?
When Jim started having memory problems, our family doctor sent him to a psychologist, who in turn sent Jim for a battery of tests.
The results of those tests proved to be a turning point in our lives.
I knew Jim was having problems, but the tests showed he had dementia.
He couldn't do simple math, count backwards from ten, or name any words that began with the letter "a." Jim had done a good job of covering his deficits, and I was shocked to learn about the problems he had with abstract thinking.
Jim became part of a study for a Phase III drug.
He was tested during each follow up visit with the neurologist.
They let me stay with him during the testing.
"What season is it," the nurse asked.
"I have no idea," Jim replied.
"Did you wear a coat today?" she asked as a cue.
"Yes." "What season do you think it is if you are wearing a coat?" "I have no idea." "Do you know where you are?" "A hospital." "Do you know what city this is?" "Yes." He couldn't come up with a name, but was confident he knew where he was.
"Do you know where the stamp goes on this envelope?" She handed him an envelope.
"Right there," he said pointing to the upper right hand corner.
He gave me a look, like he thought she might be just a bit stupid to not know where the stamp went.
It was a test, right?
Just a test.
So why did it bring tears to my eyes?
Early Onset Alzheimer's blog is in a contest for the Best Health Blog of 2012 with a $1,000 prize.
Currently, I'm in the top ten out of 300+ blogs.
You can vote via Facebook or Twitter daily between now and February 15.
Please remember to vote every day because your vote really counts!
Click on the Vote for me button on this page.
Copyright (c) January 2013 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 12, 2013>
During the holidays, you hear many heartwarming stories about people paying it forward.
McDonald's and Starbucks have had a person pay for the next car, and that person, in turn pays it forward too.
Chain reactions of generosity have been known to last for hours.
It is really cool to hear about these fast food pay-it-forward lines, and it helps restore faith in human kindness and thoughtfulness, but real pay it forward heroes are those who make it a way of life.
Volunteering is the best way of paying it forward and is one of the reasons that people volunteer.
There may be a few glory grabbing volunteers, mostly high profile people, who show up for an event or catastrophe for a photo op.
But those are the exceptions.
Most volunteers fly far below the radar, doing their best to give more to the world than they take.
Some people admire volunteers for doing what they don't feel like they have the time to do.
The thing I have noticed is that the busiest people make the best volunteers.
What makes a person volunteer?
It could be an internal desire to help others, but often a major event spurs us to take action.
I am a prime example.
At one time, I never volunteered for anything.
I figured my life was busy enough with a full time job and family to take care of.
I was fully aware I didn't have time to volunteer for anything and when I got pulled into helping, I wasn't always the most cheerful or willing person in the group.
Sure, I wanted to do a good job, but often my heart just wasn't in it.
My entire attitude and outlook changed when Jim developed dementia.
The more I learned about the disease, the more motivated I was to do whatever I could to help.
My first true heartfelt volunteer work was our local Memory Walk.
I jumped in with both feet and spent countless hours strategizing how to have a successful walk.
Since then, volunteering has become a way of life for me.
I only volunteer for causes and organizations I believe in--and only for tasks I think I can complete, and complete competently.
If it falls out of my area of expertise, then I decline because I don't want to bungle the job.
Acts of kindness for another, without thought of how it can benefit you, is paying it forward.
All you have to do is look around for opportunities.
Do you have an elderly neighbor who needs someone to help with yard work?
Do you know a caregiver that needs to run to the store, but needs someone to watch a loved one with dementia for a short time?
Maybe you know the server at your favorite restaurant has financial problems, yet she serves you with a smile.
What if you left her a $50 tip instead of $5?
Recently, I saw a post on Facebook, that said, "Taking this challenge from a friend: 2013 Creative Pay-It-Forward.
The first five people to comment on this status will receive from me, sometime in the next calendar year, a gift--perhaps a book or baked goods, or a candle, music,--  a  surprise!
There will likely be no warning & it will happen whenever the mood strikes me.
The catch?
Those five people must make the same offer as their status." My immediate reaction: "I'm in!" I reposted and now I have five friends that will probably forget all about this.
They are going to be pleasantly surprised to receive an unexpected gift, and I will have the pleasure of deciding what and when.
Paying it forward isn't about big things at all, it is about little kindnesses to brighten someone's day.
It isn't about getting a pat on the back, it's about just doing what feels right in your heart.
Paying it forward will help the giver as much as it helps the person who receives.
Copyright (c) January 2013 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 11, 2013>
There's something about this time of year, when a little rain mixed with unseasonably warm weather produces fog.
I'll admit I'm not a big fan of fog.
For one thing, it's a little spooky to be driving along and hit a heavy patch of fog.
For some reason this always seems a little bit like driving into the Twilight Zone.
Makes me halfway expect to hear strange music and to see Rod Serling, dressed in a suit and tie, standing alongside the road ready to hint at what's really going on in the depths of the thickest fog.
Fog scares me, especially since the night I was driving along a gravel road after a visit with Jim at the nursing home and hit fog so thick I couldn't see anything.
I stopped and with trembling fingers dialed my son's phone.
I was afraid someone would come along and ram into me.
"If you can't see anything then surely no one else is driving either," he said.
While I sat there waiting for the fog to lift, I couldn't help but think how Alzheimer's is like a fog blanketing cognitive skills.
Sometimes, fog just drifts in and out, but other times, it halts us in our tracks.
After a few long moments, the world became visible and I could see the road.
I drove to my son's house.
When I worked up the nerve to head on home, he still thought it was risky for me to drive, so he led the way.
His taillights were like beams shiny from a lighthouse directing me to safety.
You can be that beacon for your loved one when the fog is the thickest.
Early Onset Alzheimer's blog is in a contest for the Best Health Blog of 2012 with a $1,000 prize.
Currently, I'm in the top ten out of 300+ blogs.
You can vote via Facebook or Twitter daily between now and February 15.
Please remember to vote every day because your vote really counts!
It is easy to vote--simply follow the link below and click on the "Vote Now" button next to Early Onset Alzheimer's.
If I win, I will use the prize money to fund attendance of my 13th consecutive Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum in Washington, DC.
http://www.healthline.com/health/best-health-blogs-contest 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 10, 2013>
When your loved one has dementia, you may feel life is getting out of control.
You spend all your time putting out fires, and never have time to relax and enjoy your hobbies.
I gave some thought to some of the ways I dealt with Jim's dementia and shortened the list to five items that I found most helpful.
Prioritize.
Important      things at the top of the list.
Of course, you will need to allocate time      to spend with your loved one with dementia, but you need to schedule      breaks too.
Put aside time to spend with your family and friends.
You can      become so wrapped up in being a caregiver that you neglect the other      people you love.
Adjust Your Attitude: You      are not able to control the disease, or your loved one, but you can take      control of how you react.
I think some of the best advice I ever received      about how to deal with behaviors was "So what?" When something happens,      and no one is in danger, ask yourself "so what?" you might be surprised at      how many times it isn't really important at all.
Spend time with hobbies or      pastimes you love.
If you can't find a relative to stay with your loved      one, check into hiring a caregiver.
If you don't have respite from      caregiving, you will become so stressed that you won't be the excellent      caregiver you want to be.
Allow downtime every day.
Take a walk, go to the gym, read--schedule at least an hour a day to      indulge in relaxation.
Write.
Make lists: to-do      lists, wish lists, lists of your loved one's medications and symptoms to      help you during your doctor visits.
As important as making lists is to      keep a journal where you can write about your emotions.
Writing is      therapeutic and helps mend the rifts in your soul.
Be thankful for the time God has given you and regain control of your destiny, one day at a time.
Have a great Thursday!
May today be the beginning of a new era for you.
Early Onset Alzheimer's blog has been nominated by Healthline for a contest between the best health blogs of 2012 with a $1,000 prize.
Currently, I'm in the top ten out of 300+ blogs.
You can vote via Facebook and/or Twitter daily between now and February 15.
Please remember to vote every day because your vote really counts!
It is easy to vote--simply follow the link below and click on the "Vote Now" button next to Early Onset Alzheimer's.
If I win, I will use the prize money to fund attendance of my 13th consecutive Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum in Washington, DC.
http://www.healthline.com/health/best-health-blogs-contest  Your votes are greatly appreciated!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 9, 2013>
Today, I'm rolling out the welcome mat for my new blog followers--networked, regular followers, Pinterest, email, bookmarking the blog, or through one of the rebroadcasted postings.
I appreciate everyone who reads Early Onset Alzheimer's blog and hope you find the blog inspirational and informative.
The blog is written in a "user friendly" style even when I discuss health news.
I don't use medical jargon.
I am not a medical professional and don't like needles and the sight of blood makes me sick to my stomach.
I do have an insatiable curiosity about any breakthroughs in Alzheimer's research and therapies.
I also have first-hand knowledge of being a primary caregiver for a loved one with dementia and understand the turmoil a caregiver endures.
Most of the new traffic to my blog and Facebook is because of the Healthline Best Health Blog of the Year Contest, but I hope that after the contest is over, you continue to visit.
I also want to welcome the hundred or so people who joined my Facebook event "Vote for Linda Fisher's Early Onset Alzheimer's Blog." This dedicated group votes daily for Early Onset Alzheimer's blog and have pushed the blog to second place!
And on this middle day of the workweek, I throw the virtual door open in welcome to all who enter the blogosphere to read Early Onset Alzheimer's blog.
Vote here: http://www.healthline.com/health/best-health-blogs-contest Join the Facebook event here: https://www.facebook.com/#!/events/368925796536932/
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 8, 2013>
Tenacity is a characteristic that has a positive impact on a caregiver's effectiveness.
Alzheimer's disease can last for decades, and a tenacious caregiver has the staying power to persevere without faltering.
One of the most tenacious people I have known in my life was my mother-in-law.
She tackled life with a bulldogged determination.
When Jim developed dementia, she was a rock every step of the journey.
From the early stages to the nursing home years, her unconditional loving care never once wavered.
Today, I salute my mother-in-law and all the other tenacious caregivers who have loved ones with Alzheimer's and other terminal diseases.
It takes a special kind of person to overcome adversity and still live life to the fullest.
I want to thank the tenacious people who continue to vote every day for Early Onset Alzheimer's blog in the Healthline contest.
They daily cast a vote for Alzheimer's awareness for 26 million people worldwide with Alzheimer's and for the families that love them.
http://www.healthline.com/health/best-health-blogs-contest
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 7, 2013>
Do you remember the TV show The Jeffersons?
It had some great characters with George, "Weesie" and the maid Florence.
The whole idea of the show was that they were moving up in the world.
Their dreams had come true.
Monday always gets a bad rap.
Instead of seeing it as a time to jump in and get things done, we view it as a day that takes more coffee and more willpower than any other day of the week.
Today, the first Monday of 2013, instead of dreading the day, let's think of it as the perfect opportunity to use our talents and skills to advance to a new level--to  step up and move on up.
I hope that "Move it on up Monday" is the day that Early Onset Alzheimer's blog advances to second place in the Healthline contest.
With the multitude of family and friends voting daily, I think it is doable!
By casting your vote every day, you are an Alzheimer's advocate!
Having an Alzheimer's blog in the top 10 Best Health Blogs creates awareness.
If the blog wins first place, your vote has helped fund my attendance at the annual Alzheimer's Association Advocacy Forum in Washington, DC.
You are a VOICE for Alzheimer's!
http://www.healthline.com/health/best-health-blogs-contest
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 6, 2013>
Do you remember Mighty Mouse and his proclamation that "Here I come to save the day!" He was just a mouse, but he was mighty.
A pint-sized superhero.
Guess that just goes to prove that you don't have to be big, or well known, to make a difference.
Each one of us can "save the day" for someone.
We can say a kind word or do a good deed.
It doesn't always take something big to make a difference, it can be just a small thing like a hug, a smile, a note, or just a quick phone call to say "I'm thinking of you" or "I love you."  Here's to hoping you can be a superhero, if even in a pint-sized, or half-pint sized way.
Crank up that smile and be prepared to pass around the hugs as needed.
My Early Onset Alzheimer's blog has been nominated by Healthline for a contest between the best health blogs of 2012 with a $1,000 prize.
Currently, I'm in the top ten out of 300+ blogs.
You can vote via Facebook and/or Twitter daily between now and February 15.
Well, Early Onset Alzheimer's blog is certainly in the running for Healthline's contest.
A hundred people are my superheroes and are saving the day by pushing the blog forward, one vote at a time.
Please remember to vote every day because your vote really counts!
It is easy to vote--simply follow the link below and click on the "Vote Now" button next to Early Onset Alzheimer's.
If I win, I will use the prize money to fund attendance of my 13th consecutive Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum in Washington, DC.
http://www.healthline.com/health/best-health-blogs-contest 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 5, 2013>
Linda Fisher & Roberta Fisher,  Advocacy Forum 2012 When the Alzheimer's Association began operations in 1980 they made it very clear that Alzheimer's wasn't just a joke for late night TV.
What people previously thought of as senility had a name.
Forgetfulness might not be mental lapses, it could be a disease that destroyed brain cells.
The mission of the Alzheimer's Association is "A world without Alzheimer's" with a twofold goal of finding a cure through research and providing support and services to the families dealing with Alzheimer's and related dementia.
The Alzheimer's Association is now the largest non-profit funder of Alzheimer's research.
They offer grants to scientists for promising studies.
Along with the important funding of research, the families are not forgotten.
The Association provides caregiver strategies to help them cope with daily challenges and provide a 24/7 helpline for those overwhelming moments.
They have given a voice and a face to the 5.4 million Americans with Alzheimer's.
My personal involvement with the Alzheimer's Association began before Jim received a diagnosis.
The first call to the Mid-Missouri Chapter assured me that this organization would help us.
They threw out the life-line and we grabbed on and never let go.
Fast forward to April 2001--Penny Braun, executive director, of the Mid-Missouri Chapter invited me to attend the annual Alzheimer's Public Policy with her.
I immediately accepted.
I had been a faithful Memory Day participant at the state level, and I was eager to take advocacy to the national level.
When we arrived in DC, cherry blossoms were in full bloom.
The Forum was a whirlwind of activity and my head was spinning from the staggering statistics.
There is something about visiting senators and representatives that make you want to know the hard facts to convince them that Alzheimer's research is woefully underfunded.
It doesn't take long to discover that one of the most important jobs of an advocate is to tell a personal story.
You provide the  answer to: Why are you here, and why do you care so much?
This year, the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum will celebrate its silver anniversary!
Yesterday I received a personal email from Monica Moreno, director of early stage initiatives for the Alzheimer's Association at their national office in Chicago.
"Congratulations on your nomination!" in response to Early Onset Alzheimer's blog's nomination for Best Health Blog of 2012 contest.
If I win the contest and the $1,000 prize, I plan to help fund my annual trip to the Advocacy Forum.
Moreno continued to share some exciting news about the forum.
"I was also thrilled to see that for the past 13 years, you have been an active participant at the Alzheimer's Association Advocacy Forum which is again being held in Washington D.C. this coming April.
I think you'll be happy to know that in honor and recognition of our 25th anniversary of the Advocacy Forum, the Association is waiving the registration fee for every attendee!" Free registration!
Love it.
I believe in the Forum enough that I have paid my own way for most of the years I've attended.
Together, we can accomplish our goals.
We've fought to keep funding for Alzheimer's research through years of budget slashing.
I am pleased that I was one of the Alzheimer's advocates with boots on the ground advocating for the "National Alzheimer's Project" and the "National Alzheimer's Plan." It is heartening to know that you personally asked for and received support for this important legislation.
One of the important aspects of advocacy is to work with legislators without regard to political party.
I enjoy meeting with my senator, Claire McCaskill, and my representative, Vicky Hartzler.
I've developed good relationships with the health aides too over the years.
Most legislators like to meet personally with constituents, but sometimes it is impossible.
Aides play an important role in getting legislation passed and are typically well informed.
Alzheimer's can be a lonely disease, but one of the benefits of the forum is building close relationships with other advocates.
At the very first forum, I met Jane, Kathy, Sarah, and Ralph.
I bonded with these four caregivers in a special way.
Each year, I've met special people that enrich my life.
We've accomplished much over the past twenty-five years, but there is still work to be done!
I'll be in Washington, DC, April 22-24 for the silver anniversary celebration.
Join us to continue the fight on Capitol Hill for legislation and funding for Americans with Alzheimer's and for their families.
copyright (c) January 2013 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com My Early Onset Alzheimer's blog has been nominated by Healthline for a contest between the best health blogs of 2012 with a $1,000 prize.
Currently, I'm in the top ten out of 300+ blogs.
You can vote via Facebook or Twitter daily between now and February 15.
Please remember to vote every day because your vote really counts!
It is easy to vote--simply follow the link below and click on the "Vote Now" button next to Early Onset Alzheimer's.
If I win, I will use the prize money to fund attendance of my 13th consecutive Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum in Washington, DC. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 4, 2013>
I am blessed to have a lot of friends, and hope that you do too.
If you are like me, you hesitate to ask friends for a favor and would much rather be the one paying it forward.
Those of you who know me and who follow my blog have already figured out that although I'm involved in many things, Alzheimer's and dementia are my passions.
I've been blogging since 2008, but my mission started when my husband, Jim, was diagnosed with an Alzheimer's type of dementia at age 49.
Now, the little blog I began is visited daily by people who, like me, have had their heart broken by a disease that slowly steals a loved one away.
The circle of family and friends and their support is so important.
They are the ones that keep you going and laughing.
Their hugs are much like the mother's kiss that really can make it better.
My Early Onset Alzheimer's blog has been nominated by Healthline for the best health blog of 2012 contest with a $1,000 prize.
Currently, I'm in the top ten out of 300+ blogs.
The competition is fierce and my friends and family have kept me there for over a week.
Thank you, if you have been casting your vote each day.
If each of you will find a friend today to vote for Early Onset Alzheimer's blog, I think I can maintain my third place position and even move forward.
Who knows, if we double the votes with one friend each, we could even win this contest!
It is easy to vote, you simply follow the link below and click on the "Vote Now" button next to Early Onset Alzheimer's.
If I win, I will use the prize money to fund attendance of my 13th consecutive Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum in Washington, DC.
http://www.healthline.com/health/best-health-blogs-contest  Thank you for your support, and I hope the friend you find today is a blessing in your life.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 1, 2013>
How do you feel about New Year's Day?
Are you excited and hopeful or have you become jaded about the entire resolution thing?
I watched part of the celebration in New York City and, of course, wanted to see the ball drop.
Is it just me, or have they really blocked the view now with all the signs and advertisement?
Last year, for some reason, I decided they had not shown the ball drop because I couldn't see it.
Paying closer attention this time, I saw the ball disappear behind the countdown clock and a tower's worth of advertisements.
Does anyone else think this is a rip off?
In addition, the host and hostess yammered on about how bad 2011 was and how hopeful everyone had been last year that the New Year would be better, but 2012 disappointed everyone too.
And why did we think that 2013 would be any different?
Geeze, why don't we start out with a negative attitude--I'm sure that will make it all better.
Perhaps to some people, New Year's Day becomes a lot like birthdays--the more you have of them, the less special they become.
Well, sometimes if you have enough birthdays you get to have a big birthday celebration for landmark years--80, 85, 90, 95, etc.
The New Year, on the other hand, is always the first chapter of another book.
I don't know about you, but I always find New Year's Day a time to plan ways to make it a better year.
I cannot help it if I'm an optimist, and really why would I want to change that?
I know it's hard to feel optimistic, especially if you or a loved one are bogged down with depression or dealing with a serious illness.
Jim had health problems for many years and suffered from depression.
Life sometimes seemed overwhelming for him.
The one thing that kept him going was what he deemed "something to look forward to." For him, something to look forward to was usually a road trip to visit his beloved family in Oregon or to camp in the Colorado Rockies.
Weeks ahead of the trip, Jim would begin to spit shine and pack the van with everything we could possibly need.
One of the saddest things about Jim's dementia was that he didn't seem to be able to look forward to traveling anymore.
We went to Colorado for a few years after Jim showed signs of dementia.
After a total fiasco trying to pitch our tent, we stayed in hotels when we went to Estes Park.
It wasn't quite the same, and eventually, we substituted Branson vacations for longer trips.
Jim is the reason I love to travel.
I'll admit that our early trips were pretty much an endurance test.
With limited funds and not so dependable vehicles, some of our trips were the kind of experiences that seem better in retrospect than at the time.
Later, we learned to slow down and enjoy the scenery, or stop to see the local sights along the way.
Am I excited about 2013?
You bet!
This is going to be a year for a major life event for me.
I plan to retire from my day job after 33 years, which will give me more time to spend with family, to travel, and to write.
I've been so busy trying to fit everything in that the only time I've relaxed in months was while I was trying to fight off a bad cold.
I sat on the couch and watched hours and hours of shows on my DVR.
I watched an entire season of Leverage in two days!
The truth is that I have so little time to watch TV that I record everything and usually watch it when I should be in bed sleeping.
So, as Jim would say, I really have something to look forward to this year--time, the most precious of God's gift.
It is up to me to take it when it is offered.
Note: If you enjoy reading my blog, please vote for Early Onset Alzheimer's  athttp://www.healthline.com/health/best-health-blogs-contest or click on the Vote for Me button at the top right of this blog.
You can vote daily via Facebook or Twitter between now and February 15, 2013.
The blog is currently in the top 10 so it is easy to find!
The winning blog receives $1,000 which will just about pay for my annual trip to the Alzheimer's Public Policy Forum in DC.
Copyright (c) Jan 2013 by L.S.
Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 30, 2012>
Since I didn't have to wake up early this morning, I did.
I lay there thinking about how this year has gone and pondering my hopes for the New Year.
I don't like resolutions, so I decided on hopes this year.
After several minutes of deep thinking, I tried to go back to sleep, but Katrina decided to start yowling at the top of her cat lungs.
I checked Facebook to see where my blog rated this morning in Healthline's best health blog of the year contest and saw a post by author Linda Apple that said, "A New Year's Resolution is something that go in one year and out the other."  Linda said that's why she sets goals instead of making resolutions.
I liked the idea of setting goals too.
A goal should be measurable so you can see your progress.
For instance, instead of  a resolution, "I'm going to lose weight," you could set a goal to "Lose five pounds by Valentine's day." Makes more sense, doesn't it?
Still, I'm going with New Year's Hopes this time, simply because hope is so important.
Of my many hopes, I chose five to share with you.
I hope that      real progress is made to find a cure and effective treatment for Alzheimer's.
I'm not      hoping for something that might work someday--I want results NOW.
With 5.4      million people in the United States living with Alzheimer's, I hope that      researchers find therapies that really make a difference in their quality      of life and their caregivers' quality of life.
My hope is that a      prevention will be found so that as we Baby Boomers age, the projected 10      million cases of Alzheimer's doesn't happen.
I hope my family stays      healthy.
This      has been a tough year for my family.
In November, my brother Donnie lost      his long battle with debilitating strokes brought on by brittle diabetes.
A      scant three weeks later, my thirty-nine-year-old niece Angie lost a      year-long fight with colon cancer.
My cousins Bonnie and Alyce died and my      Aunt Lavera died from Alzheimer's.
When loved ones leave this world, we feel an emptiness that can't be filled.
They are alive in our      memories, but how we miss being able to joke with them and hug them close      to our hearts.
Our family has lost enough to last a long time.
So my hope, and      prayers, are that my huge, dysfunctional family stays healthy and happy throughout      the year(s) ahead.
I hope for World Peace.
Okay, I know that is a huge order, but if I'm going to hope, I might as well hope big.
I know from the      way Vietnam affected Jim that going to war and killing other human beings      is a burden that rests heavy on a soldier's soul.
So many aspects of war      leave both visible and invisible scars.
Each soldier's death is a tragedy, not just for the people who love them, but for all of us who reap the      benefits of freedom.
I hope for school safety.
I hope that parents can send      their children to school with confidence that they learn in a safe      environment.
I hope that real solutions are found and the safety of our children      are put first, and that we realize there are no simple answers.
I hope      that serious thought is given to making school a safe haven instead of the      status quo of political rhetoric and special interest groups.
I hope for HOPE!
No one in this country should      be without a way to fulfill his or her basic needs.
I hope for homes for      the homeless, jobs for the unemployed, and food for the hungry.
I hope for      emotional needs to be met--love for the lonely, friends for the outcasts,      family that is supportive, empathy for the struggling, and compassion for      the less fortunate.
I have many other hopes on my list.
It really isn't so important what you or I hope for, but that we never lose hope.
The final hope that I'm sharing with you today is that you have a New Year filled with health, happiness, and love.
Copyright (c) December 2012 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 28, 2012>
When a young person develops dementia, physicians have a difficult task of determining the underlying cause.
If a familial disease exits, it is easier to look at a biomarker of that particular disease, but in many cases, there is no family history and the long, painstaking process of elimination begins.
When Jim developed dementia, our process to diagnosis was a complicated path with many twists and turns.
One of the early tests was an MRI (magnetic resonance  imaging) which oddly enough was determined to be "normal."  A year later, after an abnormal SPECT (single-photon emission computed tomography) scan, the neurologist ordered a second MRI.
Unlike the MRI a year sooner, this one came back with a transcript that listed several abnormalities.
It doesn't seem to me that Jim's brain would change that much in a year, so I often wondered if clues were missed in the first MRI.
Perhaps they were looking for a brain tumor and didn't see one, or could the person who read it not notice that he was looking at the brain of a forty-nine year old man?
Regardless of the issue, I was disappointed that the initial MRI didn't show the changes in Jim's brain a year sooner.
It delayed our finding out that his forgetfulness and loss of skills was a brain disease and not some kind of mental issue.
An MRI is a valuable diagnostic tool when the information is carefully interpreted.
A new study at Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania has shown a seventy-five percent accuracy differentiating between Alzheimer's and FTLD (frontotemporal lobar degeneration).
FTLD often affect younger people and is the most common form of dementia for people under age sixty-five.
Some of the methods previously used to accurately determine the difference between early onset Alzheimer's and other types of dementia were more invasive--for example, a lumbar puncture.
Often, the real cause was not known until autopsy, as in Jim's case.
After ten years of numerous tests, treatments, and five years in a nursing home, we finally learned that Jim's Alzheimer's type of dementia was specifically corticobasal degeneration.
It was a disease I had never heard of and had not once been offered as the diagnosis.
I know the agony and frustration a family goes through while trying to uncover the underlying cause of a loved one's dementia.
Maybe in the big picture, it doesn't always make a lot of difference in the treatment.
It can make a difference in whether the side effects of some of the medication is worth the benefits especially if the drug therapy targets Alzheimer's plaques, but no plaques exist with the disease your loved one has.
Also, you wonder at what point the tests become more expensive than they are worth.
If an MRI can screen for Alzheimer's and FTLD, a more expensive PET (positive emission tomography) or invasive lumbar puncture may not be necessary.
Medication that helps with the symptoms of Alzheimer's could be targeted to those that it helps rather than given to everyone with dementia symptoms.
The researchers who conducted this study used other methods to confirm the MRI results.
Since the MRI could differentiate in seventy-five percent of the cases, only the remaining twenty-five percent who could not be determined would need further testing.
This is progress using a test that has been around since the early 1980s.
The results of this new study increases the possibility that MRIs can be used to measure disease progression in clinical trials or to determine the effectiveness of drug therapies.
Personally, I'm for anything that helps families learn what type of dementia their loved one has and for diagnostic tools that can streamline clinical trials.
Copyright (c) December 2012 by L.S.
Fisher Earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 23, 2012>
This Christmas season, I've enjoyed driving around and seeing the elaborate light displays.
It seems that some people add to their displays each year and just when you think they can't cram one more display on their lawn they go and prove you wrong.
"I think I found where the Griswolds live," I told my son a few weeks ago.
"Was it on Highway 50, toward the edge of town?" he asked.
"Yes!
I thought they lived on Highway H, but now I've decided this is where they live." This weekend, I saw a special on TV about people who spent months setting up their Christmas lights.
These are people that had miles and miles of electric lights, homemade displays, and fuse boxes that looked like they would serve a small city.
They involved their entire family in the elaborate annual productions.
One of the kids made a statement that made me realize the motivation behind this way overboard lighting exhibition.
"I thought working on the lights was perfectly normal and that everyone did it," one of the girls said.
I guess if this is how someone wants to celebrate the holidays, more power to them.
Literally.
Maybe part of the reason I don't quite "get" these elaborate celebrations is because when I grew up, Christmas was a simpler holiday.
We had a cedar tree with a few strands of garland, popcorn strung on thread, icicles, and colorful bulbs.
I can remember being really worried if we didn't have snow because I was afraid Santa wouldn't be able to get his sleigh to our house.
Some people become almost frantic to spread the joy at Christmas time, while others feel like they are letting their families down because they can't seem to find the appropriate "happy holidays" feeling.
Perhaps one of the hardest things to accept is that you can't force someone to have an elaborate or happy holiday because that is how it has always been for you.
Over the many Christmases I've seen in my lifetime, I've had good holidays and sad holidays, white Christmases and blue Christmases.
I think my peace with the holidays came with modifying my expectations.
I've found that if I expect the holiday to be something extraordinary, I may be disappointed.
If I expect it to be a time of peace and restfulness, and that is what happens, I'm perfectly content.
Holidays at our house changed with Jim's dementia.
I learned that we had to keep the holidays simpler to keep from upsetting him.
A lot of glitz and holiday cheer would leave him confused and looking for the photos I had put away.
We learned to adapt.
Simpler holidays fit into my plans better too.
As a caregiver, I was tired all the time.
It was hard to muster up the energy to do all the little things that I had done in the past.
I found alternate ways of celebrating the holidays when I couldn't spend hours shopping.
I started buying certificates of deposit for my grandkids' education.
Years of putting money aside began to pay off this year when my oldest grandson began college.
During this holiday season, if you are a caregiver, give yourself the gift of a simpler holiday.
Do the things you love to do and skip the things you do just because it's expected.
If you'd rather stay home and watch old Christmas movies and drink eggnog or a cup of cocoa, hey, that's what you should do.
Don't let others "guilt" you into making the holiday something that doesn't work for you anymore.
If you want to buy cookies instead of baking from scratch, then do it.
But if you love making sugar cookies or homemade candy, then find time for it or recruit help so that it more enjoyable.
One of the things that we enjoyed doing even after Jim was in the nursing home was to load up and drive through some of the light displays set up at the state school.
Of course, we were always looking for the Griswolds too.
As for me, I plan to have a simply wonderful Christmas time.
I want to relax, enjoy, and be selfish in celebrating the holidays in my own way.
My Christmas wish for you is that you celebrate the holidays in a way that brings peace and joy in your heart.
Copyright (c) December 2012 by L.S.
Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 21, 2012>
The biggest jokes going around on the Internet are about how today is predicted as the end of the world per the Mayan calendar.
Of course, most of us just see it as a joke since we've gone through many such dire predictions during our lifetimes.
No, it wasn't always the Mayans, it's was usually some fringe religious group who claimed to have a direct line to God's ear.
Their feelings were usually expressed as "the  world is going to end because we've turned  into a cesspool of humanity"  and "we" or possibly "they" deserve to be cremated from the face of the earth.
I have to admit that I haven't felt too well the past week and sure haven't had time to give any credence, much less joke time, to the Mayan end of the world.
As far as when that event is going to happen on a global basis, I guess I'll just have to go with what Grandma Whittle told me when I was a child and rumors of the "end" were rampant.
"Not even the angels in heaven will know that date," Grandma assured me.
I believed my grandma more than I believed some fanatic holding a sign, and my faith was well founded.
The next day dawned just as beautiful as any other day.
Now the Mayans, on the other hand, have always fascinated me.
I first read about them in social studies in elementary school.
I couldn't think of anything more fascinating to see than the Mayan structures, unless it was the pyramids of Egypt.
I dreamed of wandering through a jungle and coming up moss-covered ruins.
Is it any wonder that when my son and daughter-in-law invited me to Mexico several years ago that I was luke warm to the idea until they mentioned we'd be staying close to the Mayan ruins?
Then I was all eager to go and number one on my list of things to see was Chichen Itza, or Chicken Pizza as my son called it.
Of the four of us, I was probably the only one who was thrilled to be wandering around in the sweltering heat and pushing past the droves of locals hawking cheap tourist trinkets.
Always one to push the lure of Mayan culture to the limits, I went to a closer attraction the next day on my own.
Unfortunately, that day was the closest I'd ever come to heat stroke and that took a little bit of the fun out of it for me.
But, on day one, I had absorbed a lot about the Mayan culture.
They were violent people who believed in rewarding the victors of "ball games" by allowing the team leader, or captain, to serve as a sacrifice to the gods.
I'm thinking that my heart wouldn't be much in a game if winning meant I would be beheaded.
The Mayans may have seemed like mythical, powerful people with a vision of life, but they were selfish people who used their superior power to inflict unspeakable pain upon others to promote their beliefs.
They built their temples, buildings, and structures to benefit the elite group of leaders.
Sounds impossible, doesn't it?
Or maybe not so much if you just look around.
Here at home, now, we just witnessed an unspeakable disaster in an ordinary community and rather than respectfully allowing the families to mourn, we are intruding with the media.
Politicians are scrambling to make their point as to why their political stance on constitutional rights or gun control is the answer to preventing disasters in the future.
I've seen this disaster blamed on everything from lack of prayer in school to not allowing teachers to pack side arms with their lunchboxes.
If the truth is told, there is no simple answer because this isn't a simple problem.
A lot of worlds ended at Sandy Hook, and it wasn't because a Mayan calendar predicted it.
All I can say is, that if I didn't believe my Grandma Whittle and figured that if the angels in heaven didn't know when the world was going to end, I wouldn't have any money left in the bank today.
Nope.
I would have spent every blasted penny and had one heck of a good time in the process.
I wouldn't be sitting here at home; I'd be with my family sharing every happy memory I could.
Obviously, since I'm just watching TV...not something that even gets close to the bucket list...I'm expecting tomorrow to be just another day.
As long as I don't have visions of jungles, winning ballgames, or watching heads roll, I plan to have just another ordinary night and wake up to a new day tomorrow.
While I'm at it, I'll just thank God that I'm not a Mayan.
Copyright (c) Dec 2012 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 18, 2012>
My little fire earlier this week wasn't the first one I'd had, but I was a little out of practice and might have slightly overreacted.
The last fire happened when my kids were little and we lived on Newland Hill--not too far from where I live now.
That time, the fault was a wood stove with a pipe too close to the ceiling and an inexperienced fire builder--me.
Probably the funniest part about the story was that Eric was a little boy and he was in the bedroom where the fire started.
He was blissfully playing the chord organ and hadn't noticed that the ceiling was on fire.
I got Eric out of the bedroom and ran to the kitchen to see what I could get some water in to throw on the flames.
I found a large mixing bowl and ran across the floor.
I looked up at the flames eating away at the ceiling and hesitated as I thought about what a mess it would make.
Then, I realized that that wouldn't be close to the mess the fire could make.
I gave a mighty heave and sure enough the flames were fewer.
I ran back through and dialed my sister-in-law and handed the phone to Eric.
"Tell her to call the fire department," I said.
I knew Dinah's number but didn't have a clue what the fire department's number was, and believe it or not, we did not have 911 service.
Finally, on one of my trips back through, I grabbed the phone and ordered the kids to go outside.
"I think I've got it," I said, "but they should probably check to make sure it isn't smoldering anywhere." I called Jim at work and Marcie, the unambitious secretary informed me that he was on a ladder and couldn't come to the phone.
"We have a fire at our house," I said.
"I need to talk to him now." Needless to say, Jim and my inlaws beat the fire department by fifteen minutes.
Later, my sister-in-law told me that Eric's voice was so high that she didn't recognize him, and all she could think of was that some little kid's house was on fire and in desperation, he had called her number.
When the fire department arrived, they chewed me out for  putting the fire out on my own.
I really think the house would have burned to the ground if I'd just gone outside and waited for help to arrive.
A few weeks ago, my ancient microwave finally bit the dust.
It quit working and smelled like an electrical fire.
I wasn't home at the time, but Eric took it out and set it on the porch and tried to get the smell out of the house.
I went without a microwave for several weeks much to everyone's surprise.
"How are you cooking your oatmeal in the mornings?" my daughter-in-law asked.
"The old fashioned way," I said.
"I use a pan." I finally broke down and got a new one because, let's face it, that caused more dishes to wash.
I scoffed at my youngest son when he said I needed to rethink how long to cook things with a "real" microwave instead of one so old it had a dial and the strength of a strong light bulb.
"We have one at work that has a higher wattage.
I know how to use a microwave," I said.
Sure enough, I could cook oatmeal in my new microwave and warm up my coffee when it got cold.
Not a problem.
Sunday, I wasn't feeling too well and thought that a baked potato sounded good.
Without a clue as to how long it took to bake a potato in the new microwave, I proudly use the preset for "baked potato" and wandered back into the living room to continue watching a show on my DVR.
Suddenly, I heard a strange popping sound in the kitchen, then a slutter, and crackling.
I jumped up and as I rounded the corner, I saw a potato in full blaze in the oven.
I shut it off and without hesitation, threw some water on it.
Soon I had the fire out.
Then, I remembered to unplug the microwave.
"You should have used flour," someone told me.
"Well there was a small sack of flour on the counter, but it wasn't a grease fire.
The water worked," I said in my own defense.
"Don't use that microwave until you have it checked out." "Not a chance," I said.
"It's slightly melted inside the door.
Good thing I bought the extended warranty." Or, it really didn't matter since that was for two years instead of one.
Guess that oven's going back under that, "in case you are unhappy for any reason" clause.
The house was filled with a thick haze of smoke when it occurred to me that not one of my smoke detectors had gone off.
Guess I forgot to change the batteries when we "fell back" this year.
Better put that on my to-do list before I get my new, new microwave.
Copyright (c) December 2012 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 9, 2012>
One thing about losing your eyesight when you are young is that you don't consider poor vision a sign of aging.
Lately, I've been having some problems with my vision in addition to the nearsightedness that hit me when I was thirteen years old.
At that time, I was blissfully unaware I had a problem until I couldn't read the math problems the teacher wrote on the blackboard.
When I got my first pair of glasses--bifocals, no less--the most amazing thing to me was that I could see the individual leaves on trees.
It was a real plus to be able to recognize people at a distance too.
Yes, everything more than a few feet away was pretty much a blur.
Lately, I've been having vision problems again.
This time, I'm having trouble seeing up close.
I know you are thinking that un-huh, everyone seems to get farsighted as they get older--or else the arms aren't long enough.
I still have bifocals on my glasses, but I can see better without them when I'm trying to read Facebook on my cell phone, or even reading my book at night.
A few weeks ago, I had my eyes examined, and my prescription had changed slightly.
Since it was such a small change, I decided to wait until after the first of the year so I could get new frames.
In the meantime, and maybe even after getting my new prescription, it's just easier to take off my glasses to see.
One night last week, I was lying on the bed, reading a post on Facebook.
I took off my glasses to see better.
I decided to respond to a post, and I just don't type all that quickly on my cell phone.
Eventually,  I shifted to a more comfortable position and finished.
I picked up my glasses to put them back on and they were smashed flat.
The earpieces lay flat against my forehead.
Well, what the heck are you supposed to do with a pair of glasses like that?
For a few seconds, I thought about what it would to see the world as a blur again and not be able to recognize people.
That is something that happens all the time in the Alzheimer's world.
Often, visual problems for someone with dementia isn't eyesight, but rather a perception problem.
Damage to the brain may keep them from being able to interpret what their eyes are seeing.
Eyeglasses may not be the answer to this type of vision problem.
A person with Alzheimer's can have several different vision problems.
They may become lost because they cannot interpret the familiar landmarks their eyes see.
A person with Alzheimer's may have problems detecting motion.
This difference is sometimes described as comparing how most of us view the world as a movie to a person with Alzheimer's seeing a series of still photos.
Another vision problem is with contrast.
It may be confusing for a person with dementia if everything in the room is the same color.
They may stumble over an object, that to their eyes, blends in with the background.
Knowing my vision problems could be solved with glasses, I rummaged around in the drawer where the old glasses live and found a gigantic pair from the late eighties.
Nope, didn't want to go there even if they are now "retro" and back in style.
I finally found the most recent pair of glasses prior to the ones I pancaked and decided I didn't like the way they looked.
Eventually, I found a pair that I liked and put them on.
Whew.
Don't know what I would have done without glasses.
I couldn't have driven to work, or been able to do anything once I got there.
Someone teased me saying that I could have just Duct-Taped the earpieces back on.
Although that seemed ludicrous,  I have some photos of me taken when Jim was still in the service and we lived in Manhattan, Kansas, and I'm wearing a pair of glasses with one of the earpieces taped back on.
That was during one of the periods when I wore contact lenses most of the time, and frankly, with a little baby and on army pay, it just wasn't that important.
I think the most amazing thing about the old glasses is that I can read my Facebook just fine with them on.
Isn't that just a little bit weird?
Since I smashed my glasses flat, I can see clearly now.
Kind of makes me wonder if I want that new prescription after all.
Copyright (c) December 2012 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 2, 2012>
My brother Donnie's memorial service Friday was a reflection of his life and provided closure for our family.
Our family pulled together to plan a tribute that combined displays of personal items and pictures with personal stories, often humorous.
Donnie had suffered from multiple strokes brought on by diabetes.
Donnie had been in a nursing home for four years.
During that time, his quality of life degenerated.
He was often cantankerous and always hard to understand.
The strokes had affected his speech and it was common to have to guess what he was saying--often wrong--or to ask him to repeat himself.
Although a different cause, in many ways, Donnie reminded me so much of Jim's dementia journey.
They both became dependent on others to take care of them as their conditions worsened.
Donnie and Jim both had mothers who remained committed to caring for them.
My mother-in-law didn't miss many days looking after Jim, and my mother not only looked after Donnie, but also moved to town so that she was  within a few blocks away from the nursing home.
A serious illness is hard on the entire family, but nothing can compare to a mother's heartbreak of watching a child, no matter how old, develop a terminal condition.
It just isn't in the natural order of life for parents to outlive children.
From the time a child is born, parents see that child as their legacy and someone they can love and cherish for the remainder of their lives.
Whether a loved one has Alzheimer's, strokes, diabetes, cancer, or hundreds of other conditions, the grief is ongoing for family members.
When you see someone fighting for life, or accepting that death is the only outcome, the grieving process begins long before his or her final breath.
Grief in these circumstances is ambiguous, without an end in sight.
Throughout the course of the illness, there is no closure, and if your loved one is unhappy or in pain, that distress becomes a part of your every waking moment.
Family members and caregivers often feel guilty that they are able to enjoy many of the things their loved one can't.
Yet, complete happiness or enjoyment is illusive when always in the back of your mind is the thought that you need to provide a level of companionship and comfort for your loved one who is in the nursing home, hospital, or perhaps still at home.
If you are a primary caregiver, your loved one is on your mind when you wake up in the morning and the last thing that crosses your mind when you go to sleep at night.
You are constantly second guessing yourself as to whether you have done everything possible to make life as comfortable and fulfilling as you can.
You may have left your loved one in the care of professionals, but you know they have others to tend to and you are afraid that something will fall through the cracks.
I know that after Jim wasn't able to feed himself, or even get a drink of water on his own, it was something I worried about constantly.
It eased my mind to drop by the nursing home each night after work and on weekends to make sure he was okay.
If I wasn't able to go, I knew that other family members would check on him.
I know that my mom will now be at loose ends and find herself feeling like she is forgetting something as she goes through this transition from being a primary caregiver to leading an ordinary life.
It will be months before life returns to normal.
Caregiving is an all-consuming condition that affects body, mind, and spirit.
It is a labor of love that becomes a way of life.
Copyright (c) December 2012 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 22, 2012>
This morning I woke up with a sense that the world had changed--and as soon as I cleared my mind, I knew it had.
I woke up with grief on my heart, but joy in my soul.
After spending two days and a night with my brother Donnie, I had come home to rest and prepare to stay Thanksgiving night, if it was needed.
It wasn't.
I hadn't been asleep long last night when my sister Terri called to let me know that at 11:30 Donnie had gotten his wish for a peaceful transition from this world to the next.
Often, Donnie expressed his wishes to just "go ahead and die." And he came close many times, but for some reason his body betrayed him and kept on living.
Each time, as he groused around about not dying, I could always coax a smile out of him when I would say, "You don't get to pick your time, and it just isn't your time, Virginia Fisher." Donnie often told the story of coming to the hospital with my mom to visit my mother-in-law when she was gravely ill. Virginia said her good-byes to everyone and then was fighting mad because she didn't die once she was ready.
Mom always let Donnie know when I was coming to visit.
The last time I visited him, he had refused his pain medication so he would be awake when I got there.
After a few minutes, he pushed his buzzer to let them know, in no uncertain terms, he was ready for his pain medication.
"It's your fault," he said, but I knew he was just teasing me.
On a more serious note, he said,  "I'm either asleep or in pain." When I visited Donnie, he was usually in a bad mood and had a lot of complaints.
I would let him rage on and then steer him into reminiscing.
He seemed to come to life when I brought up some of our shenanigans.
Although it seems that the "three little boys," as we called Donnie, Marshall, and Mitchell, spent most of their time playing together, Donnie and I seemed to have this experimental flair for food.
If I needed someone to share a lemon with, Donnie was always willing to eat the other half.
One time we ate all Dad's Tums without regard for how he was going to treat his heartburn.
Another time, it seemed that toothpaste sandwiches had to be good.
That was probably our worst idea.
In September, close to his birthday, Donnie went through a bad spell and wasn't expected to make it through the weekend.
He had not responded to staff or hospice.
When I walked into his room, I said, "I didn't bring you a lemon." He quickly responded with "What kind of sister are you?"  Our conversations weren't always just banter.
Once he told me I had no idea what it was like for him.
I agreed that I didn't know what it was like.
Sometimes I felt downright guilty that I have been so blessed and his life has been one of illness and disappointments.
Tuesday when I walked into Donnie's room, it was the first time he had not responded to my voice.
He seemed to be sleeping soundly and comfortably, pain free.
Mom told us that last week Donnie told her he had a miracle happen.
He said he walked to the nurse's station and talked to them.
He said when he got back, his bed was turned in the wrong direction.
Maybe it was this story that prompted the talk about haunting.
In our family, there are no "sacred cows" and we've always been open with each other.
My sister Terri made it plain to Donnie that she didn't want him to haunt her.
Tommy, on the other hand, told him he could come to see him anytime.
I held Donnie's hand and didn't voice my opinion on the subject.
At one time, everyone left the room and I had a few moments alone with Donnie.
I sang "Amazing Grace" to him.
Okay, so he wasn't in any position to complain about my lack of singing talent, and I think his roommate is hard of hearing.
I whispered a few messages for him to pass along.
Yesterday afternoon, I said good-bye to Donnie and came home to rest and pack supplies to stay with him tonight.
I was rambling around the house and decided to take a shower.
I always do a lot of heavy thinking in the shower and my thoughts turned to Donnie and his "miracle."  I stepped out of the shower and as soon as I wrapped the towel around me, I knew Donnie was there.
I didn't see him, and I think that was on purpose because he wouldn't want to totally freak me out anymore than he would Terri.
I could feel his presence and an image popped into my mind.
He was smiling and walking.
I knew he was saying good-bye and that he wanted me to know he was okay and could walk again.
Then he was gone.
We always consider that the soul leaves the body at the time of death, but now I believe it may leave even sooner.
It was another five hours before he stopped breathing.
Donnie was his own person, and danced to the beat of a different drum.
He was often troubled, and in a perfect world, he would not have lived the past half dozen years.
We all know this world is far from perfect, and there must have been a reason Donnie lived through out-of-control diabetes and multiple strokes.
I don't claim to know that reason and can't even hazard a guess.
Maybe Donnie knows now, and someday maybe I'll know.
In the meantime, earthly life goes on for the rest of his family and friends, but we are thankful that Donnie is experiencing the joy of reunion and new beginnings.
Copyright (c) November by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 19, 2012>
I always thought Thanksgiving got shortchanged when compared to some of the other holidays.
In fact, it seems that most people spend much more preparation for Halloween than for Thanksgiving.
Just think about it--people buy candy, costumes and plan elaborate parties or "trunk or treat" events.
I heard on the news that Americans spent $370 million on pet costumes this year.
In fact, nationwide we spend a staggering $8 billion on Halloween.
Before the trick-or-treaters change out of their costumes, the stores are arranging elaborate displays of Christmas items.
There's hardly a pilgrim or turkey to be seen.
Thanksgiving is not considered so much a holiday in its own right as it is a kickoff to the Christmas season.
Most people spend their Thanksgiving putting up the Christmas tree, stringing lights, and this year, it seems that many retailers are getting a jump on black Friday by beginning Thursday evening.
Seriously?
What are they thinking?
It seems that we can't spend a complete twenty-four hours being thankful.
We have to rush right past being thankful to the shopping frenzy.
I can tell you right now, there is absolutely zero chance of me shopping on Thursday evening, or Black Friday either, for that matter.
Nope, I plan to spend my Thanksgiving Day doing exactly what a person is supposed to do on Thanksgiving--watch the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade, eat myself into a stupor, and maybe do something really exciting and unusual--take a nap.
Thanksgiving has always been one of my favorite holidays since the days when I used the outline of my hand to draw turkeys and color them with bright crayons.
Our classrooms at school were decorated with autumn leaves, pilgrims, and Native Americans that we blissfully and without malice referred to as Indians .
For years, our family used Thanksgiving as a reunion time.
I loved the holiday--getting together with my brothers and sisters, Mom and Dad.
When I close my eyes, I can see our family circled, holding hands as my brother Tommy asked the blessing before we lined up to fill plates from a table groaning beneath the weight of food, food, and more food.
Thanksgivings from years past form a tapestry of fall flavors and fragrances in my memories.
There was always that nagging feeling that beloved family members might be missing at the next gathering.
After Dad died and Mom moved out of the family home, for several years, we converged on my brother who lived there.
Eventually, we rotated the holiday among us "kids" and decided to have it earlier in the year.
So, in essence, we celebrated Thanksgiving at my sister's house in October this year.
Jim is one of those missing from those family holidays now, but still I am thankful that we had almost thirty-four years together.
I'm thankful that I learned unconditional love when I was Jim's caregiver, but that I also received unconditional love from him before the disease took him away.
I still observe the day and it is special to me, although the meal has completely changed from the traditional turkey, dressing, and dinner for few an intimate group of fifty or so.
It doesn't matter how we celebrate, as long as we can take one day of the year to be thankful and reflect on life, family, and the blessings that come into our lives.
There is nothing in this world as precious as family.
All other holidays seem to get lost in the process of celebrating, but Thanksgiving is more laid back.
Mentally, we can still go "over the river and through the woods" to a more peaceful frame of mind.
Copyright (c) November 2012 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 12, 2012>
My five-year-old grandson spent the night with me recently, and he just wasn't interested in going to sleep.
He wanted me to read The Cat in the Hat which he said he hadn't heard before.
He was so impressed that he asked me to read it again.
I'll have to admit the Cat has been a favorite in this house since my kids were little.
Finally, exhaustion took over--for grandma--and we both headed off to bed.
I cannot sleep unless I read.
That's just the way it is for me.
Usually, by the time I get to bed, I'm so tired, that I can only read for five or ten minutes.
So I picked up The Courtship of Nellie Fisher, a book I've been reading on for months.
In my defense, it is three books in one, and I'm nearing the end.
My grandson rolled over onto his stomach and propped his DSI on the pillow.
After putting a racing game into motion, he put his elbows on the bed, stuck his hands beneath his chin and watched the cars race around the track.
After reading a few minutes, I put my book down.
"Time to turn off your game and go to sleep," I said.
No response.
"Come on," I said, "it's bedtime." I leaned closer, and saw his eyes were shut tight.
I turned off the game and rolled my sound asleep grandson into a more comfortable position.
I was wide awake at four in the morning.
My mind was spinning with all the things I had to do.
The more desperately I need sleep, the more elusive it is.
After tossing and turning for an hour with no signs of sleepiness taking over, I turned on the light to read for a while.
I looked over at my grandson who was lying crosswise in the bed.
I could see his body, but not his head since it was hanging over the edge.
Once again, I got him situated.
My sleep problems began with Jim's dementia.
It has been a decade since Jim's sleep pattern changed so much that it affected both of us.
Jim got to the point where he just didn't seem to need sleep anymore.
When he didn't sleep, I usually didn't either.
Sometimes, I was so exhausted that I didn't wake up when he crawled out of bed to wander through the house--or out the door.
I remember the night I woke up from a sound sleep and he was gone.
I jumped in the car and went looking for him.
I was frantic until I found him meandering down the road as if it was perfectly normal to be walking in the middle of the night wearing sunglasses.
For someone who didn't want to sleep at night, Jim always seemed to take a nap, or two, during the day.
Then, by evening, he would become restless.
This is a common problem known as sundowning.
We were getting about four hours sleep on a good night.
Chronic lack of sleep becomes a habit and just being tired isn't reason enough to go to bed.
It's usually when my eyes start burning or I nod off watching TV that I know it is time to give it up.
Since I have to get up early to go to work, I try to get to bed at a decent hour.
When I make a real effort to go to bed early, then I'm wide awake at three or four in the morning and can't go back to sleep.
It really seems like a preference as to whether I want to stay up late, or wake up in the middle of the night.
My sleep, or lack thereof, goes hand in hand with how hectic my days are.
From time to time, I'd just like to sit down and do nothing for an hour without feeling guilty.
Between hectic days at work, volunteering, writing, and my publishing business, I'm no longer just burning the candle at both ends, I've torched the middle as well.
I guess if the candle burns out, maybe the darkness will help me sleep as soundly as my grandson.
Copyright (c) November 2012 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com For more about sleep changes visit http://www.alz.org/alzheimers_disease_10429.asp. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 11, 2012>
Now, the election is over and, once again, the airwaves are returning to normal.
It seems that in every political contest this year, whether the office of dogcatcher, or that of President of the United States, it was a sparring contest to see who could be viewed as the most patriotic.
Flags came out in abundance and even the states turned red and blue on the political map .
In their fervor to be elected, it would seem that politicians seemed to forget that we are all players on the same team.
Soldiers fight for freedom for all of us without regard to which political party we support, or what church (if any) we attend, whether we are millionaires or living paycheck to paycheck, or even if we have no paycheck at all.
We are American's every day and enjoy the freedom that was purchased with the lives of sons and daughters who fought to keep us that way.
Yes, we should celebrate our freedom every day, but instead we honor our veterans twice a year--Memorial Day and Veteran's Day.
Two days.
Think about that.
Shouldn't it be more like honoring veterans 363 days and maybe allowing ourselves to be totally selfish and forgetting them two days a year?
Memorial Day is a day to remember those who died in the service of our country, but Veteran's Day is a day to show respect and honor all veterans.
Originally known as Armistice Day, the eleventh hour  of the eleventh day of the eleventh month was to mark the end of World War I, the "war to end all wars."  As we all know, the First World War was, unfortunately, not the end of all wars.
In 1954, the holiday was changed to honor veterans of all wars.
Then after a brief time when it was changed to coincide with a three-day weekend, it was returned to November 11 without regard to the day of the week.
Today is a time to turn our thoughts and gratitude toward those veterans who put their lives on the line and count our blessings for living in a country where our individual rights have been guaranteed by our veterans.
I don't have to look far to see veterans to honor.
I have nephews who previously and currently serve in the military.
My dad fought in World War II, my brother Tommy was wounded in Vietnam, my brother Jimmy sailed into danger zones throughout his career in the Navy, and Jim's tour of duty in Vietnam left him wounded in body and spirit.
During the World Wars and following the wars, veterans were hailed as heroes for offering up the ultimate sacrifice to protect our country.
When the war was over, thousands of soldiers returned to parades and crowds of grateful Americans.
Things were pretty clear-cut until Vietnam.
That war stirred up emotions during the turbulent Sixties that threatened to destroy the unity of our people.
Veterans returning from the "conflict" were jubilantly greeted by their loved ones, but the nature of the war brought veterans home one-by-one.
When Jim returned home from Vietnam, he was greeted by three people--his mom and dad, and me.
That seems like a small reception for someone who just spent a year in the jungles of Vietnam experiencing atrocities that would haunt him even through the throes of dementia.
It takes a lot out of a country boy to have to kill other human beings.
I thought the war was over for Jim when he came home.
Instead, like many others who love a veteran, I eventually learned that the war would never be over for him.
No one knew the pain in Jim's heart the way I did.
On this eleventh day of the eleventh month, I would like to wish a happy Veteran's Day to all who have served our country and to those who are serving our country now.
Although today marks a special day for veterans, they deserve credit for every day of the year that we wake up in the United States of America.
Copyright (c) November 2012 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 4, 2012>
Those of us who struggle with weight know that carrying around additional pounds increases our chances of diabetes and heart conditions.
I always figured that weight is so hard to manage because, as humans, we have to eat.
It's not like some optional thing we can just quit cold turkey.
Nope.
It's always there no matter what.
I made the mistake of stepping on the scales after Business Women's Week when we seem to eat our way through the entire seven days.
We had lunches and dinners every day.
Then to top it all off, we had meals catered in at work during training for our new computer software.
As if I hadn't consumed enough calories, the week ended with our Sedalia Business Women's annual chicken dinner.
I know that a few extra pounds adversely affects my blood pressure, cholesterol, blood sugar, and triglycerides.
We are considered to have metabolic disorder when we have high readings in two or more of those numbers...and in my case, it is "more." Each year, I dread the health survey our insurance company insists that we complete.
"It's depressing," said one of my co-workers.
I have to agree with that assessment.
Often, I go into the survey feeling pretty good, especially for a woman of my age.
I may have the occasional ache or pain, but in general, I'm rarely sick.
Then, I take the health survey and it indicates that I'm just a heart attack waiting to happen.
The survey says I'm at high risk for this and for that until I just want to throw my hands up and say, "Lord, take me now." The only good news I ever receive from the health survey is high marks on the substance abuse, mental health, and safety sections.
Otherwise, I think I'd flat line on the health survey.
Of course, all my problems are from weight, and it's not as if I haven't tried every diet that promises to melt away the pounds.
The bad thing about diets is that sometimes they work so well that I wonder how I ever let my weight get out of hand.
Usually, a diet requires me to eat a certain food and avoid others.
Once in a while, I'll see a diet that says "and you can eat dessert!" The aforementioned dessert might taste a lot like sweet cardboard, but hey, if I'm hungry enough that might be just what I need.
It seems that no matter what the diet, as soon as I revert to anything like normal eating habits, the pounds pack back on until I've reached, or exceeded, the same weight that drove me to diet in the first place.
As if being overweight isn't enough of a problem on its own, now obesity has been linked to cognitive decline.
Being obese and having metabolic disorder accelerated decline in the study group.
It isn't really just a slight increase either--the increased risk is 22.5%.
I guess the only good news coming out of this study is that by losing weight and lowering the biomarkers, you can cut your risk of obesity related cognitive decline.
This study just underscores the validity of the Alzheimer's Association's healthy brain imitative.
The Alzheimer's association recommends a healthy diet, such as the Mediterranian diet, which limits red meats, but includes vegetables and whole grains.
Along with the healthy diet, exercise will increase blood flow and oxygen in the brain.
Isn't this what our health survey says is good for us?
Oh, well, maybe there's a reason for it after all.
The good news from all the studies on Alzheimer's disease is that sometimes food has beneficial qualities that help fight dementia.
I love it when I see that coffee helps ward off dementia, or even better is a new study that found dark chocolate helps keep the brain sharp.
I'm not making this up either!
Okay, so the study was conducted by Mars (the candy bar people) but that doesn't mean it isn't true.
Cocoa has flavanols like those found in red wine, grapes, apples, and tea.
In theory, it sounds simple and easy, but putting healthy habits into action is difficult.
Maybe if I'd pay more attention to diet and exercise, my problems wouldn't be so weighty.
At least not so very, very weighty.
Copyright (c) November 2012 by L.S.
Fisher Earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 24, 2012>
Questions are a good way to learn.
My grandkids have always known the value of well-placed questions.
Their vocabulary is rich with why?
and  how?
Curiosity is a learning tool, and children have no qualms about asking questions about any topic.
At work, my co-workers often say, "I have a question for you." I like to reply, "I have answers." Sometimes, I don't really have answers, but until proven otherwise, it seems like a good response to the statement.
Then, there's always the contingent that answers questions with questions.
"Where do you want to have dinner?" might be answered, or should we say a non-answer, could be, "Where do you want to eat?"    On Sunday, Pastor Jared introduced me to a new concept: praying through questions.
By forming prayer as a question, we can focus on what is important to us.
It is amazing how easy it is to ask questions--especially for a person like me who has more questions than answers.
Some of the bold questions I have for God--what causes Alzheimer's disease?
Why can't researchers find a cure for Alzheimer's?
After all, isn't research a matter of knowing what questions to ask, and then embarking on a quest to find the answers?
Equally important is the wisdom to recognize the answers that are revealed to us.
Knowing how to ask the right questions is a methodical way to find solutions.
When researchers try to find a cure for a multifaceted disease, Alzheimer's, for example,  they ask a series of questions.
Some of the brightest minds in the country have ask questions about Alzheimer's.
I find it interesting to check health news sources to see what studies and approaches are being used to find treatments or a cure for Alzheimer's disease.
So I search with the question in mind--what is being done about Alzheimer's?
Painstaking research shows that changes in the brain foreshadow development of Alzheimer's.
These changes can take place a dozen years before any evident symptoms.
New imaging technology allows researchers to see these subtle brain changes.
In 2013, five drugs will be tested on 1500 individuals at risk for Alzheimer's.
The drugs being studied are designed to prevent Alzheimer's from ever developing.
How can Alzheimer's be stopped when we don't really know what causes it?
One researcher, Randall Bateman with Washington University in St. Louis, sees the development of Alzheimer's disease as being much like the chain reaction that leads up to heart disease.
How effective new drug therapies will be is uncertain, but it is certain that new drug therapies are much more likely to help future generations that those with the disease now.
Why can't a cure be found now, for the people who already have Alzheimer's?
Maybe we need to trust in a higher authority to rid the world of Alzheimer's once and for all.
Pastor Jared's message reminded me that you must ask, if you want to receive.
Without questions, there would be no answers.
Copyright October 2012 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset@hotmail.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 8, 2012>
Some seasons are more challenging than others, and it seems that the seasons of change are the most difficult.
As much as we get bored with the same old, same old, those days are more restful.
I woke up at three o'clock this morning and added a half dozen reminders to my cell phone task list before the alarm went off at five.
Why am I so geared up?
We have changed computer software at work and today I close the month end books in a completely different way than I have for the past thirty years.
It's not that I think I'm too old to learn, and most of the time I'm confident that everything will work out, but at three o'clock, nothing seems to be easy.
My preoccupation with the changes in the workplace and the way that time seems to keep marching along, have seemed to overloaded the circuits in my brain.
I've found myself forgetting more than I seem to remember.
I'm usually reliable not only in my professional world but in my volunteer world.
It could be that I've taken on way too many things--ya think?
It has come to the point that I need to practice the word "No" or the phrase "That doesn't work for me." I need to back off, but can't decide what projects or causes need to be cut.
I only take on those things I'm passionate about or that I enjoy.
My life is so busy that I don't have any down time.
I'm not recharging my mental batteries, and I've drained them to the point that I think they may need to be replaced.
I'm not sure how that works.
These forty hour intense, nothing is routine anymore, workdays and evenings filled with working on one thing or another is wearing on body and soul.
Oh, how I long for a morning drinking coffee and watching some mundane show on TV while I leisurely decide what I want to do that day.
The thing about change is it requires us to be flexible and adaptable.
We can embrace change or resist change, but darn it--it's going to come either way.
Deep inside, I love a challenge.
I think I'll just drink another cup of coffee and go for it.
Thank goodness there's only one Monday in a week and only one day that is the first day of any change.
Copyright (c) October 2012 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 1, 2012>
I attended a conference in July where Dr. Mike Perko talked about inspiration.
He talked about how other people can inspire us, and how we can inspire others through volunteering.
Inspiration can help us to accomplish more than we ever dreamed possible.
One of the inspiring people Dr. Perko talked about was Oscar Pistoruis, from South Africa--the fastest man without legs.
You may remember Oscar from the Olympics.
Oscar ran the 400 meter semi-final race amid some controversy as to whether his carbon fiber blades gave him an advantage.
He finished last, but was by no means a loser.
He inspired people all over the world and more important than where he finished in the race was that he ran the race.
In church this morning, I learned that the origin of the word inspire means to breath in.
Inspiration is literally the breath of life.
Inspiration is what makes us more than our physical beings.
When we are inspired, we change how we think and even how we feel about ourselves.
How less meaningful would life be without inspiration?
Without inspiration, we would go through life without inhaling that sense of awe and wonder that boosts our spirits and gives us a feeling of balance with the world around us.
It doesn't take fame or fortune to inspire others.
One of my inspirations is my niece, Angie, who is battling cancer.
Angie says that cancer gave her clarity.
Things that once seemed important have been replaced with those that really are important--family and love.
Angie posted on Facebook that her hair had started coming out in clumps, so with the help of her best friend and her husband, clippers, and a lot of sobbing, the hair came off.
She said it would probably be awhile before she allowed any pictures to be posted.
Two days later Angie posted a picture where she is wearing her beautiful smile and proudly sporting her new 'do.
Today she posted a picture of her and her best friend, who shaved her own head too, with the caption, "Baldies stick together." When someone faces adversity with a smile and a lust for life, it inspires others.
We find the purpose of our lives from the events that drop us to our knees, the times that touch our hearts and our souls.
Jim's dementia was that defining moment in my life when I felt a call to action and became an Alzheimer's volunteer.
It wasn't long before I realized that my volunteer work helped me as much as it did anyone else.
Research shows that volunteering can be good for your health, attitude, and feelings of self worth.
Volunteers are less depressed and healthier than people who do not volunteer.
Older adults who volunteer for about two hours a week have additional benefits of higher function levels and increased longevity.
When you think about it, volunteering helps get your mind off yourself and increases your awareness of the more important aspects of life.
Or as Angie would say, "Clarity."    Most of us aren't in a position to change the world.
What we can do is work on our little corner of the world to make it a better place.
We can inhale breath from those who inspire us and exhale breath to help pass that inspiration on to those we care about, those we love.
Copyright (c) October 2012 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 23, 2012>
A Walk to End Alzheimer's is a time for us to think about and remember those with the disease.
This year we had pinwheel flowers to symbolize our relationship to those with Alzheimer's.
Those of us who had lost a loved one to Alzheimer's received purple pinwheels, and thirty-three members of Jim's Team received purple pinwheels in remembrance.
Purple was, indeed, the most popular color.
As I signed copies of My Recollections, Our Memories, I heard recollections of a lot of loved ones with Alzheimer's.
One man told me that his mother was in a nursing home in Florida and had all my books.
"She reads them over and over," he said.
"She'll be so happy to have a new one."  Longtime volunteer, Anna Lee, had recently lost her brother to Alzheimer's.
She had her big smile, as usual, but tears glistened in her eyes as she talked of her loss.
They shared their stories, their hugs, their tears, and their hope that someday this disease that brought us together would become a distant memory.
At the conclusion of the Walk, we held what might be our last symbolic balloon release.
The company where we've been buying our balloons told us that helium is hard to get and they may not have helium next year.
As we released the purple balloons, they flew off toward heaven with our messages of love on them.
As I was packing up after the walk and preparing to hustle off to another appointment, my niece, Rhonda, showed me a handmade poster.
She had written some of her thoughts about her Uncle Jimmy, and surrounded the words with photos, butterflies, and hearts.
She had found several photos of Jim in his denim jacket, one where he is wearing his favorite blue plaid shirt, one in a tux, and yet another where he is wearing a sweatshirt and sweat pants sitting in his recliner at the nursing home.
Rhonda gave the poster to me, and I hugged her as I hustled off to another appointment.
Later in the afternoon, I pulled into the Walmart parking lot and took a moment to catch my breath.
I picked up the poster from the passenger seat where I had stowed it.
As I read her words, I cried for the first time that day.
This is what Rhonda wrote: Always Remember My Uncle.
I remember so many things about my Uncle Jimmy.
When he and my Aunt Linda lived in their trailer, they had a big black bird that could talk; it was mean to everyone except Jimmy.
They had a mean cat too, that bit me, lol.
When they were building their new house, Jimmy had a nervous breakdown and had to go to the hospital.
I can remember when I went to see him that he got on one knee with his arms out to me, waiting to give me a big hug.
When the house was finally built, they began working on the basement.
There were paint cans everywhere and I was running around and fell.
When I fell on the paint can, I busted my nose.
Jimmy kissed it and carried me upstairs giving me hugs and kisses, and candy, making it all better.
Later he got in trouble for giving me the candy 'cause I left sticky fingerprints all over the hallway walls.
I was sick a lot when I was growing up and had to spend much time in the hospitals.
When you're a kid in the hospital, you don't know anyone and it kinda feels like you are in outer space.
But Jimmy never failed to be there for me.
Every time I was in the hospital, he would drive all that way even if he didn't have an appointment.
It always made me feel a lot better to have him there with me.
These are just a few of my many memories of my Uncle Jimmy.
I love and miss him very much.
Even though in the end, he couldn't remember us, we will NEVER forget him.
I couldn't have said it better myself, Rhonda.
Only I don't think your Uncle Jim ever forgot you, and your visits to him in the nursing home brought smiles and love into his world.
Copyright (c) September 2012 L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 8, 2012>
I like to start the day with a bowl of oatmeal, and usually it goes without incident.
I scoop out a quarter cup of oatmeal, sprinkle cinnamon on top, throw in some raisins, a half spoon of Splenda, and a half cup of water.
Easy peasy, right?
Well, at least most mornings.
One day last week, I went through the whole routine, but when it was time to put the oatmeal away, I couldn't find the lid.
I searched the countertop, checked the living room, and even looked in the refrigerator.
How could a lid disappear into thin air?
Since I'm on a tight schedule in the mornings, I decided the best thing to do was slip a freezer bag over the top.As soon as I put the makeshift lid on top and picked up the oatmeal to put it away, I discovered the lid was on the bottom.
Somehow, I'd managed to set it down perfectly and the lid was invisible because of the way I looked at the box.
Had I logically thought about it, and looked at the box in a different way, I would have seen the lid.
Instead, I saw just what I expected to see--a box of oatmeal with the lid missing.
I seem to spend a lot of time looking for items I can't find.
It reminds me of how Jim used to say, "Right here but I can't find it." That's how I felt Thursday, when I took a day's vacation to be prepared for my two commitments that night.
I was so geared up that I woke up hours before the alarm was set to jangle me out of bed.
First, I needed to get things ready for my Business Women's meeting, and then for the Walk to End Alzheimer's bank night.
For bank night, I needed to register more team members, and type donations into the spreadsheet.
I put on a pot of coffee, fired up my netbook and prepared to go to work.
For the Business Women's meeting, I went to my roll-around bag to get my president's pins to put in the box I use for items to put on the "sharing table." Not a problem.
That's where I keep them.
Except, they weren't there.
I spent an hour searching high and low, while the clock ticked away.
I wasn't getting anything done.
Finally, I decided hunting for something I couldn't find wasn't a good use of the limited time I had, so I moved on.
I worked steadily throughout the day and was proud of my accomplishments.
Done in plenty of time for the three o'clock setup for Bank night.
I dressed for the evening's activities, in purple, of course.
My purple nail polish was wearing off, so I decided to re-do my nails.
They sure looked pretty--at least until I dinged one of them up and had to strip that nail and polish it again.
I knew my nails weren't completely dry, but I needed to be going.
I hauled my bags to the car, and took off.
Wow!
On time and all.
So good.
About a quarter of a mile down the road, I noticed I had another messed up nail--much too bad to ignore.
But, no problem, I could touch it up since I'd put the polish in my purse--hadn't I?
Just to be on the safe side, I stopped for a quick search.
I didn't see the polish, so I turned around and went back home.
I parked my car in the driveway and hustled down the walk to the door.
I was drenched in sweat.
I re-applied deodorant and walked into the living room to pick up the polish.
It wasn't there.
Okay, it must have been in my purse after all.
Back to the car, dumped out the purse--no polish.
Down the walk, to the door, more sweat, re-apply deodorant, and search for nail polish.
There it was in the kitchen.
Why?
I have no idea.
Had I only looked in a different way when I came through the door, I would have seen it.
After all, it was hiding in plain sight.
When I think back on the last few days, I have to consider Alzheimer's warning sign #7: Misplacing things and losing the ability to retrace steps.
Hmmm.
Yep.
That's been happening a lot lately.
I refuse to look at the other warning signs--I'm not in denial, I believe my brain has simply short-circuited with the overload.
At least, that's the way I choose to look at it.
When we look at life, we often look at it in the same old way.
We miss so much because we don't step back and take a fresh look.
We see what we expect to see instead of what is right in front of us.
Copyright ( c) 2012 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 23, 2012>
The law protects us against age discrimination when we pass our fortieth birthday--at least for employment purposes.
We are up in arms when someone is discriminated against because they have an age disadvantage.
We don't think about how age discrimination can affect someone who is too young.
With early onset Alzheimer's, discrimination works in reverse.
This was pointed out in a recent Town Hall Meeting to discuss the National Alzheimer's Plan.
At a meeting organized by the Alzheimer's Association Southeast Florida Chapter, Laura Jones spoke of the lack of services for her husband, Jay, who at fifty years old, is too young to qualify for services in place to assist the elderly.
The Jones family story is one that any of us who have had a loved one with dementia understands.
Almost all programs are developed to deal with Alzheimer's only as disease of the elderly.
Alzheimer's is not a normal part of aging, it is a disease.
The vast majority of people with Alzheimer's are sixty-five or older, but an estimated half million Americans develop Alzheimer's before their sixty-fifth birthday.
When Jim was diagnosed with dementia, I left no stone unturned in my efforts to find a cure.
I just couldn't believe that he could have a disease that had no effective treatment or cure.
It was our hope that he had a reversible condition.
His Alzheimer's type of dementia diagnosis came after a process of elimination.
Once we received the devastating news, my next hope was to get him into a research program where a new, untested treatment might be the answer to our prayers.
We had our hopes up when he was able to enter into a trial for a new drug developed by Bayer.
The small study was conducted by a neurologist in Columbia, Missouri.
After discussing it with our sons, we began the process to enroll Jim in the study.
Unfortunately, none of the study group finished the six-month trial when side effects brought the study to a screeching halt.
Regardless of the outcome from our initial experience, I watched for other studies.
When I looked at the guidelines, one of the criteria for the larger drug trials was always--"must be older than sixty-five." I saw news about innovative research where  studies would be conducted across the country--the closest one was in Oklahoma.
I knew it would be inconvenient, and I would have to take time off work, but I wanted Jim in that study.
Of course, it had the minimum age, but I decided to pursue it anyway.
I talked to one of the researchers and explained that my husband was in his early fifties, but had been diagnosed with an Alzheimer's type of dementia.
Boy, was I flying high when he agreed to waive the age limit.
Then, in the same conversation, my hopes were dashed over Jim's problems with communication.
Because of Jim's aphasia, he would not have been able to answer the researcher's questions necessary to measure the effects of the treatment.
There is probably no greater test for a family than to watch a loved one succumb to an incurable, progressive disease.
I have never been prouder of my family than during the ten years of Jim's disease when they hung in there providing love and support for us.
Jim was shy of his sixtieth birthday when he died.
Monday will be a hard day for those who loved him and remember that he would have turned sixty-seven.
Ironically, he would have met the age requirement for those services and research studies he didn't qualify for in his lifetime.
I don't think many of us consider sixty-five to be elderly.
At least I don't, but then I'm inching closer to that magic age every birthday.
When it comes to being included in medical studies, there is no place for age discrimination.
Copyright (c) 2012 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 11, 2012>
I heard on the news that a new survey indicated most people thought they looked better than they actually do.
We have become a nation with the wicked queen attitude chanting, "Mirror, Mirror on the Wall, who is the fairest one of all?" No matter how beautiful you think you are there is a Snow White in everyone's world.
In a way, you have to admire people with that much self confidence, but I can't help but think about the ones that zoom in on their flaws.
Anorexia can sometimes be blamed on the image a person sees when she looks into the mirror.
She may be thin to the point of starvation and still see herself as an obese person.
Mirrors are not always our friends, especially for someone with Alzheimer's.
For a long time I didn't truly understand how much trouble a mirror could be in a special care unit.
Jim never seemed to have a problem with his mirror--in fact, he seldom looked in it.
I combed his hair, washed his face, and shaved him, so he didn't have any need for a mirror.
Then, one day as he passed in front of the mirror, he glanced into it.
He started yelling, grabbed his head with both hands and rubbed his hair vigorously.
Either he didn't recognize himself or he was upset with the way he looked.
We removed the mirror from his room.
Jim didn't talk, but from conversations with other residents, it was obvious that most thought they were many years younger than their actual age.
Most of the female residents in the unit flirted with Jim because he was the only one young enough to interest them.
These women didn't need a mirror to tell them they were young and good looking; they just knew it.
It is enough to make you wonder whether they see their image as a distortion of the real person they are inside.
When a person has Alzheimer's, it is possible that what they see is similar to what we see when we look into a funhouse mirror.
Do you remember the short squat images, or the tall wavy reflections?
In those cases, we could laugh because we knew it was not a true image of how we look.
But what if instead of the familiar face we expected to see in a normal mirror, we saw the reflection of stranger?
It would be like a horror movie come true.
Many Alzheimer's units do not have mirrors in the rooms.
If you take care of a person with dementia at home, you may have to cover or remove the mirrors.
No matter how we picture ourselves in our minds, we do recognize ourselves in the mirror.
In the fairy tale, the wicked queen talked to the mirror, but I wonder what the mirror would say if it could talk back.
In that extreme, she saw herself as the fairest of all.
Some people focus on the negative when they look in the mirror.
People with Alzheimer's see strangers.
Copyright August 2012 by L. S. Fisher  http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 29, 2012>
Jim was always adventurous and talked about the places he really wanted to go, but hadn't been.
With his extensive traveling, it was a pretty short list.
He wanted to go into space--the final frontier of Star Trek fame.
More realistically, Jim wanted to go to Alaska--the last frontier.
Jim talked about Alaska and the wide open spaces, mountains, snow, ice, sled dogs.
I thought about glaciers, landslides, grizzly bears, danger, and goosebumps from bone-chilling below zero temperatures.
Jim and I were alike in many ways, but this frontier business wasn't one of them.
He always said he wished he had lived back in the frontier days.
"Have you ever thought about how long it would take to cross Kansas?" I asked him.
It seemed to me that it took forever to cross Kansas in a car, and couldn't fathom making that trip in a wagon.
"Not to mention the little problem with having to hang onto your scalp." He really didn't want to get me started on this topic.
I didn't think about the adventure--I thought about the inconveniences.
Not even Matt Dillon or Rowdy Yates could have lured me back into the untamed Wild West.
No thank you.
As far as the "final frontier"--space--no way did I want my body rocketed into the wild blue yonder at warp speed.
I won't even say what going into space would scare out of me.
Jim never personally saw either of these "frontiers" but, ironically, I was invited along for an Alaskan cruise.
My brother and sister-in-law planned to treat Mom to a cruise and even stranger was that it took only about a nanosecond for me to agree to go as my mom's roommate.
The process took several months, but on the first of July, we flew to Seattle to board the ship for our cruise.
As I looked at blue icebergs in Tracy Arm Fjord, rode a train to White Pass and Yukon, gazed at glaciers, admired upside-down tree gardens, rode in a horse-drawn carriage, and cruised on a luxury liner that reminded me of the Titanic--especially as we navigated through the icebergs.
The rugged landscape does indeed look like a frontier.
The cold was the extreme opposite of the weather at home.
Cell phone conversations were filled with the triple-digit weather while I shivered in my coat.
I heard about the drought at home while we lamented the elusive sun and the almost constant rain.
Okay, I'll admit, that seeing Alaska from a private deck on a Carnival cruise ship is not in anyway a hardship .
We spend days relaxing and cruising past majestic mountains, icebergs, and glaciers.
Heck, I could even watch from the comfort of my bed.
And we never knew what it was like to be hungry.
It seemed that we spent our time onboard either eating or being entertained at one of the full production shows.
My mom, of course, enjoyed the casino and we were forced to keep her company.
We had trouble finding our way to the dining room, but never had a problem finding our way to the casino.
Then, when we would make our way back to the cabin after our activities, our bed would be turned down, a mint placed on the pillow, and towel art animals would be on the bed.
Snuggled beneath the covers, it was easy to forget how chilly the weather was outside.
It was a trip I enjoyed, but Jim would have been ecstatic to behold the Alaskan landscape.
At times, I could almost feel Jim looking over my shoulder and know he would have loved spotting whales, bears, and wildlife.
I used his "animal watching" binoculars to get closer views of the wonders unfolding around us.
Traveling with Jim is one of the things I miss.
Jim loved frontiers whether final or last.
Strange, unchartered ground brought out his sense of adventure.
Copyright (c) July 2012 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com   
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 15, 2012>
Recently, I heard from Dr. Christopher Tokin, an ABC health writer, requesting an interview for an article about new therapies for Alzheimer's disease.
After reading my blog and one of my books, he wanted to include information about Jim in an article introducing the Alzheimer's Association International Conference in Vancouver.
Being the skeptical person I am, the first order of business was to check out Dr. Tokin to make sure he was the person he said he was.
After a Google search, I was confident that Dr. Tokin was a health writer for ABC news.
I had no problem answering his questions as long as he did not ask for my social security number, birth date or bank account number.
I was getting ready to leave on an Alaskan cruise so I used my time in Seattle to answer Dr. Tokin's interview questions.
I've been interviewed before by national news media including a telephone interview while I was at a conference in Boston.
I know that national media will interview several people and then choose one or two of the stories to include in the article.
When I read the previous article, my interview was not included.
This time, I just didn't mention the interview and thought I'd wait to see if Jim's story was included in the article.
My first day at work after my cruise, I heard from my son.
"Did you know there's an article online about dad?" He went on to tell me he was browsing the news on his cell phone when he saw an Alzheimer's article.
He started reading it and realized the Jim Fisher in the article was his dad.
"Dr.
Tokin interviewed me before I left on the cruise," I said.
"He was going to send me a link to the article when it was published."  I looked at the news feed on my phone and the article was indeed in the health section.
A few hours later, I received an email from Dr. Tokin with the link to the article.
By then, the article had been shared on Facebook.
This morning, I went in to read some of the news from the conference and one of the articles is "New Drugs Aimed at Ending Alzheimer's Decline."  This in Dr. Tokin's article.
He used Jim's story to personalize an article on new drug treatments.
Two of the drugs targeting beta-amyloid, Eli Lily's solenezumab and Pfizer's bapineuzamab, are in Phase III clinical trials.
The Alzheimer's Association's International Conference gives the world a chance to learn about research targeting 2025 as the date to find a cure for Alzheimer's.
Scientists try many approaches to diagnosing Alzheimer's early and developing therapies to target the hallmarks of Alzheimer's--beta amyloid plaques and tau tangles.
As the week unfolds, we will learn more about new studies like the one that shows a change in walking can indicate Alzheimer's disease before cognitive symptoms appear.
People with undiagnosed Alzheimer's disease may begin to walk slower and take shorter steps.
The interesting thing about gait is that some people performed well on the clinical tests, but at home, family members observed that their loved one walked much slower.
Walking speed, like other symptoms of dementia, rely on family observations as a key component of making a diagnosis.
When you know someone well, you notice things about them that doctors don't.
A ten-minute exam might miss many of the symptoms of serious brain disorders.
When Jim developed dementia, it was my observations of changes in his behavior and skills that convinced the doctor that it was more than depression.
We lost Jim more than seven years ago, but he is not forgotten by the family that loved him.
Jim would have been pleased to know that his story provides an illustration of hope for the 5.4 million Americans with Alzheimer's.
"New Drugs Aimed at Ending Alzheimer's Decline."   http://abcnews.go.com/Health/Alzheimers/drugs-aimed-ending-alzheimers-decline/story?id=16766730 copyright (c) July 2012 Linda Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 3, 2012>
I met Carolyn outside of Perkins for a late lunch.
"There's my sister's car, so she is already here," she said.
Just inside the door, Carolyn hugged stood a pretty dark-eyed woman, so I knew this was her sister Julia.
We admired the pies while we waited to be seated.
How well this lunch would go remained to be seen.
I was about to meet a woman who was beginning the Alzheimer's journey.
Julia's husband has early onset dementia, and she is just beginning to understand what a complex and emotional road lies ahead.
We studied the menu and had pleasant, light conversation just like any three women without any serious cares.
We contemplated the merits of breakfast versus lunch.
As usual, I chose the tilapia and Julia followed suit.
Carolyn easily chose breakfast.
Julia pulled up pictures on her phone of her beautiful daughters and grandchildren.
Her eyes sparkled with love and delight as she talked about her family.
Eventually, the talk turned to Alzheimer's, the elephant in the room we had been avoiding.
I wanted Julia to lead the conversation.
She talked about how everyone seemed to have a solution.
She has already read up on the scary disease and knows how limited the choices are and how unpredictable day to day can be.
The things she was talking about reminded me of a man who interrupted a presentation I was in the process of giving to announce he had cured his wife of Alzheimer's.
He had given her some kind of concoction that, according to him, was a miracle cure.
"How is she doing?" I asked.
"Oh, she passed away, but she didn't have Alzheimer's anymore." I didn't relate this story to Julia, but I shared others.
We talked about medication.
Her husband is using an Exelon patch.
I told her that none of the Alzheimer's medications worked for Jim and that he had side effects.
We talked about how some medications work the opposite on someone with dementia.
A prescription used to calm most people may hype up someone with Alzheimer's.
Julia had a good grasp of how important it is to tweak medications and monitor them.
"I'm confident that I can take care of him no matter what happens physically," she said.
"What I'm not sure about is how I can handle the grief." Her eyes now sparkled with unshed tears.
"Grief is the hardest part," I said.
"There is no defined beginning and it just goes on and on." There wasn't any way to sugar coat her emotional future, and I wouldn't insult her by saying it would get better.
I was impressed that Julia did understand even at this early stage what her biggest challenge was going to be.
Initially, most of us worry more about the physical challenges of Alzheimer's--behavior, incontinence, feeding, bathing--instead of the emotional upheaval of losing someone we love one memory at a time.
Julia does has the same important advantage that I had.
She has family to love her and support her throughout the challenging days ahead.
Julia doesn't need a lot of unsolicited advice from well-meaning friends or acquaintances.
She will get her medical advice from a trusted physician, and her emotional support from her family and close friends.
We met as strangers and parted as women who had bonded.
With the love and support of her sister and the rest of her family, she will make it through the journey.
As I hugged her goodbye, I'm confident that she is a strong, grounded woman who will meet the challenges ahead of her.
Copyright (c) July 2012 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com   
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 20, 2012>
My day begins with music when my radio comes on a few minutes before the alarm tells me it is time to jump out of bed.
Last week, I heard a song by Hometown News called "Minivan." The song tells a story about the milestones in a man's life through the vehicles he owns.
Dad trades in his Corvair for a butt ugly station wagon.
The trade was so traumatic for a young boy that he hid beneath the dashboard when they drove through town.
Then as he grows up, another milestone, he buys his own car...a four by four...and cruises for chicks.
Of course, life doesn't stand still so eventually, when he has kids of his own, it is time to trade in his pride and joy for a minivan.
As we travel through life's journey, our trip is marked with milestones.
From our first breath to our last one, we meet milestones with anticipation, or perhaps regret.
While day-to-day humdrum events fade into memory, milestones are set apart with their own set of reminiscences fraught with feelings.
Our entire lives we move along looking forward to the next milestone.
Do you remember how you wanted to be an adult so your parents couldn't tell you what to do?
Since being an adult took too long, you may have settled for getting your driver's license--another milestone.
Graduation, marriage, becoming a parent...more milestones.
The "Minivan" song struck a chord with me.
It stayed on my mind, and I asked my son if he had heard the song.
"No," Rob said, "but I've heard about it.
One of the guys at work was talking about it." The song reminded me about a conversation at work last week.
One of my co-workers mentioned how she and her family were ready to go out to eat and her oldest son, a teenager at the time, refused to go to town with them because they weren't wearing designer jeans.
"He says he can't believe he acted like that," she said.
"I was so upset at the time." Now she laughs about it.
"That's our job as parents," I said.
"We're supposed to embarrass our kids." Looking back on those times that once mortified us can be some of our best memories.
Distance can take away the anger and hurtful words and replace it with the powerful love we feel for family.
Sometimes family members talk about how embarrassing people with dementia can be.
Especially those with frontotemporal dementia can be outspoken, or even rude, as they struggle with out-of-control emotions and verbal communication.
Each personality change is a milestone we dread.
Jim, who had smoked from the time he was a young teenager until he was nearly fifty years old became completely intolerant of cigarette smoke.
He constantly told his sisters, "You should quit smoking those damn cigarettes." They merely laughed and agreed with him.
Not satisfied with telling his sisters, Jim became focused on telling everyone he saw they should quit smoking.
We walked out of Walmart one day and three or four people were sitting outside on a bench smoking.
Jim walked over to them, pointed his finger to emphasize his words, and said, "You better quit smoking those damn cigarettes." I hustled him toward the car before any of them had time to react.
As the disease progressed, Jim's behavior became more erratic.
On one trip to Eddie's Drive-In, Jim picked up tip money off a table, and I made him put it back.
We walked outside, and as I fastened his seatbelt, I discovered he had the salt and pepper shakers clutched tightly in his hands.
When I took the shakers back inside, the waitress laughed and said, "Just when you thought you had him figured out he did something different."   I finally reached a milestone when I knew the disease was to blame, not Jim, and I was no longer embarrassed.
In fact, I've found with age, I'm not easily embarrassed.
When I was younger, I might have found myself beneath the dashboard just like the boy in the song.
Now that I've traveled many miles along life's journey, my philosophy is that it's more important to see the view.
Copyright (c) June 2012 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 11, 2012>
Picture courtesy Michael Muin At our last Alzheimer's Board meeting, we were treated to a tour of Missouri University's Center for Translational Neuroscience.
Our tour included the stroke laboratory, behavior core facilities, surgical suite, cell culture facilities, and neuropathology-histology laboratories.
This was the first time I had ever seen the inside of a research lab and it was doubly interesting to be inside a lab dedicated to studying the brain.
One reason mouse models work well for Alzheimer's research is their brains similarity to human brains.
I was impressed by how Alzheimer's treatments can be evaluated, and the extensive research conducted on exercise and diet.
Agnes Simonyi, PhD, is the researcher who "trains" the mice to find their way through a maze to measure spatial memory.
We saw the different mazes Dr. Simonyi uses in her research.
One maze has symbols around the sides, such as an X or plus sign.
One symbol has an opening beneath it.
The mouse runs around and around until he discovers the opening.
Each day the mouse is in the maze, he can find the opening by making fewer trips around the parameter, until eventually he heads straight for the symbol that shows the way out of the maze.
You wouldn't think that watching a mouse run around in circles could be so fascinating, but the studies prove which therapies improve the mouse's performance.
When Dr. Simonyi showed us the graph, a few things became evident.
Food and exercise make a big difference in memory.
One of the tests evaluated green tea.
Oh, yeah, I thought, a human would probably have to drink a gallon of green tea a day to show a similar improvement in memory.
As if she read my thoughts, Dr. Simonyi said, "The mice were given the equivalent of two cups a day."  She went on to show a wheel where the mice could exercise.
It looked kind of like a treadmill for the little fellows--one of those contraptions were you run and run but don't go anywhere.
I didn't see any little TVs like Brian's Gym has.
They were just running around and around for the fun of it, I guess.
The graphs showed  mice that exercised and drank green tea were the smartest of the groups, followed by the ones that only drank green tea.
At the bottom were the mice that resemble most of us--not enough exercise and not paying attention to filling our bodies with antioxidants.
Dr. Grace Sun talked about her research comparing Alzheimer's mice to their healthier counterparts.
She talked about current Alzheimer's therapies and how available drugs work only for a limited time.
One of the studies Dr. Sun is working on is how a healthy diet, exercise, and stress reduction can be preventative therapies for Alzheimer's.
Some of the foods she mentioned as having a positive impact on memory are grapes, curry, green tea, and elderberries.
Dr. Sun said MU will host an international symposium on elderberries in June of 2013.
These healthy berries are plentiful in Missouri and have always been popular for jelly and wine.
"The Power of purple" in the June 2012 issue of Rural Missouri talks about the promise of elderberries as a super fruit.
They aren't the kind of berry you would eat fresh--they are too tart and not that tasty without a little sweetening.
I have often promoted the healthy brain initiative on my blog and the rule of "what's  healthy for your heart is healthy for your brain." Nothing drives that home like having a researcher stand in front of you and talk about their personal observations of the benefits of a healthy diet and exercise.
Part of research is geared toward delaying the onset of Alzheimer's.
It would seem that an important part of the key is in our supermarkets, our gardens, and maybe even along the fencerows and road right-of-ways in rural Missouri.
If we pump up on exercise and eat a brain healthy diet, we can follow the example of the mouse in the maze.
I'm looking forward to stocking up on healthy food and then being able to go straight to my car in Walmart's parking lot instead of running around in circles until I happen upon it.
I know it can happen because a little mouse told me--with a little help from his friends, the researchers at the Center for Translational Neuroscience.
Copyright (c) June 2012 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 28, 2012>
It always seemed a little strange to me that my level-headed and intelligent husband developed dementia at such a young age.
I always wondered how much his dementia had to do with his tour in Vietnam.
Years after the fact, it is now presumed that anyone who served in Vietnam was exposed to Agent Orange.
There was a time when you had to prove exposure and that was not an easy task.
Jim said that while they were in the jungle, they were sprayed with Agent Orange right along with the foliage.
After the presumption of exposure, certain diseases among Vietnam veterans were considered to be service connected.
Dementia was specifically excluded.
Jim had post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) before it was ever talked about.
His Vietnam service left him wounded emotionally.
Vietnam lived in his nightmares, in his breakdowns, depression, and through flashbacks.
Vietnam was a parasite that clung to him and never lost its grip as it tried to suck sunshine from his soul and replace it with dark shadows.
Studies have linked PTSD with an increased risk of Alzheimer's or dementia.
Prolonged or acute stress damages the hippocampus, the part of the brain that controls memory.
Veterans with PTSD have a 77% greater chance of developing dementia than veterans without PTSD.
The VA acknowledges a third of Vietnam veterans struggled with PTSD, and some of those lasted a lifetime.
They don't talk so much about how many lifetimes were cut short by alcoholism, suicide, or dementia.
The Internet has conflicting reports about Vietnam veteran mortality.
They range from reports that Vietnam veterans are dying at an alarming rate to other reports that their death rate is only slightly higher than the rest of the population.
The truth probably lies somewhere in between.
It seems that of the Vietnam veterans I know, an alarming number of them died young.
I know that Jim died much too young.
Jim was haunted by Vietnam.
He struggled daily to relegate his tour of duty to the past.
It was a personal victory of heart over mind when he enjoyed his family and his music.
Playing his guitar was his therapy.
Did Vietnam cause Jim's dementia?
I think it did.
Is there proof?
There never was enough to convince the VA. We couldn't even prove PTSD because by the time we knew it was considered a reason for disability, Jim had dementia and could not tell his story.
It didn't matter than I had lived with him all those years and supported him through his mental collapses.
It didn't matter that as his current memories faded, the older memories haunted him even more.
The turbulent Vietnam war years did nothing to help returning veterans get their lives back.
They were stigmatized and categorized in a way our military had never been before that war.
The only thing that brings me comfort is that Jim did finally come to grips with Vietnam on a certain level.
He wore a hat that said "Proud to be a Vietnam Veteran."  On Memorial Day, I placed flowers in front of the columbarium.
Jim would have loved the rows of flags placed in front of the wall.
He loved his country, and I'm glad that he finally found pride in serving the USA.
Source: http://www.elementsbehavioralhealth.com/trauma-ptsd/ptsd-in-veterans-linked-to-dementia-in-later-life/ Copyright (c) May 2012 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 25, 2012>
I just read an article about May being "Older American's Month" and the theme is "Never too old to play." I really like that theme and the message it sends.
This made me wonder--how did I get older without knowing May was MY month?
After all, I've been hearing from AARP for a long time now and it seems like every funeral home within a hundred mile radius has me on their mailing list.
From the article, I made my way to the website.
I had to make sure that this wasn't just a joke or something.
The site has many cool things on it, including "The Best Ways to Play." *         Get Physical--okay, I admit that I dropped my gym membership at just the time when I needed it most.
That's how it goes.
Once I got caught up in the endless cycle of being involved with three or four organizations, I just flat didn't have time to go to the gym.
Now, my exercise consists of toting around several bags of papers, books, files, and reference materials.
It just gets heavier and heavier.
*         Brain Activities--I pass this one with flying colors.
My brain is so active that I can't shut it off.
I'm always thinking, planning, learning.
*         Bridge the Generation Gap--What gap?
I've always loved people of all ages.
I enjoy spending time with my grandkids, kids, aunts, uncles, and my mom.
My friends are multi-generational.
*         Get creative--seriously?
I write.
I have a pretty good handle on this older American thing.
I have no shame when it comes to getting a senior discount.
At our Friendship Lunch yesterday, we had quite a discussion on the advantages of joining AARP.
"Don has a lifetime membership," Cindy said.
"I really like the magazine." "I've been getting offers and I'm thinking about joining," said Brenda, who just recently squeaked past the minimum age for AARP.
When we get older, we start to realize that we are not invincible and the obits are not our friends.
We see former classmates, cousins, friends, and family fall to diseases that become more prevalent as we grow older.
We cross our fingers and pray that cancer, heart disease, and Alzheimer's stay away from us and those we love.
The knowledge that we are mortal and vulnerable makes each pain free, sunshiny day more precious.
It is as if I'm on a carousel going around in circles with each day pretty much like the one before and strikingly similar to the one ahead.
There is comfort in knowing that life is whirling along on an even keel.
Anytime that life glides along in a smooth circle is a time to relax, enjoy the ride, and play.
Getting older should be a time when we can be more of ourselves.
As my mother recently said, "I don't care what other people think of me anymore.
It just isn't important." Yay, Mom!
We are all better off when we reach that turning point in life when we can live life the way we want to live it and not the way others want us to live it.
When we get older, we should be able to play to our hearts content.
We are never too old to play, or to be young.
No matter how old the calendar says I am--or how old I may look--I'm still young on the inside.
Have you noticed how the bar for what is considered older, just keeps getting higher?
Is today's 60 the new 40?
It's time to catch up on all those things we never had time for when we were younger.
It's  time to finish that bucket list.
Maybe it's time to join AARP.
After all, we older Americans are all about discounts and bargains.
I scoff at people who indicate that I'm over the hill.
All I have to do to feel younger is turn the XM radio to the 60's channel.
When I hear that music, I'm a teenager inside with a world of possibilities and experiences ahead of me.
Age, after all, is only skin deep.
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher May 2012 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 12, 2012>
Roberta Fischer, Rep. Hartzler, Linda Fisher If we want to declare war on Alzheimer's, advocates and researchers form the frontlines.
What's at stake in this war?
The lives of 5.4 million Americans living with Alzheimer's disease will be lost.
Who lies within the danger zone?
One American in eight over age sixty-five has Alzheimer's, and those who live to be eighty-five and older have a fifty percent chance of developing the disease.
The war against Alzheimer's begins with a battle called the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum.
Our mission is to carry a strong message to our legislators to implement the National Alzheimer's Project Act (NAPA) and co-sponsor the HOPE for Alzheimer's Act.
We are the faces and the stories of a heartbreaking disease that currently has no effective treatment or cure.
My sister Roberta and I traveled to Washington DC to join more than 700 advocates to speak with the VOICE of hope and reason.
This was my twelfth consecutive trip, and you would think by now, I would just leave it to others.
My reminder of why this is so important to me was reinforced by a side trip to the Veteran's Cemetery on the way to the airport.
I placed flowers in front of the columbarium to mark the seventh anniversary of Jim's passing.
I paused to reflect on the Alzheimer's type of dementia that robbed Jim of not only his life, but also ten years leading up to his death.
Kathy and Sarah at Candlelight Rally 2012 Each year I see familiar faces, especially my good friends Kathy and Sarah, who have run the Alzheimer's gauntlet from beginning to end.
Then there are new faces of caregivers and people with Alzheimer's who are reeling from the diagnosis and trying to cope with the drastic changes Alzheimer's has made in their lives.
One of the early events each year is the candlelight rally.
The event was scheduled to be at the Capitol Building, but weather forced it indoors.
After stirring music and testimonials from former Congressman Moore and other advocates, we lit glow sticks and held them high in remembrance of our loved ones and to honor the caregivers and persons living with Alzheimer's.
The roll call of the states was filled with exciting progress made in all fifty states.
After a full day packed with research updates, advocacy training, and discussion of our federal priorities, we finished the day with the National Alzheimer's Dinner where Meridith Viera served as Master of Ceremonies.
The Profile in Dignity Award was presented to Pat Summitt, University of Tennessee Women's Basketball Head Coach Emeritus, and her son Tyler.
After a humorous film showing Pat motivating her team, she invited us to join a giant team to fight Alzheimer's, and, of course, losing is not an option.
On Wednesday, we donned our purple sashes and armed with facts, figures, and personal stories, we headed out to storm Capitol Hill with our message.
We asked for the resources to support NAPA.
For the plan to be successful, we need a two-pronged approach.
(1) The plan needs to include benchmarks that allow legislators to evaluate progress, and (2) resources of $100 million annually for Alzheimer's research, education, and caregiver support.
In addition to NAPA, we asked for co-sponsors for the HOPE for Alzheimer's Act.
The Hope Act focuses on three key areas: diagnosis, care planning services, and medical record documentation.
I know from personal experience, the vital importance of these three areas.
Because Jim was so young, it was hard to get a diagnosis.
Once we knew he had dementia, care planning for him and support for me were key factors to consider.
This Act allows the caregiver to discuss options with or without the person with dementia present.
I kept record of Jim's treatments, other medical conditions, and test results and provided the document to every specialist that treated him.
For those who don't have someone to do this, medical documentation would ensure the entire medical team was aware of all health issues.
After our visits, we entered the Capitol Building to see the House in action.
As we went through security, the guard handed me my purple Alzheimer's Association bag, and leaned close to whisper, "Thank you for doing such a good job." As I smiled at him, I realized he knew the pain of having a loved one with Alzheimer's.
Seven hundred Advocates made a commitment give a VOICE to Alzheimer's research and care.
In this war against Alzheimer's, our VOICEs are indeed mightier than the sword.
Copyright (c) May 2012 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 22, 2012>
My sister and I rolled our suitcases down the sidewalk to the designated area to catch a cab to our hotel.
We had come to DC to ask for resources to support NAPA (the National Alzheimer's Project Act) and seek cosponsors for the HOPE (Health Outcomes, Planning and Education) for Alzheimer's Act.
"What brings you to DC?" the cab driver asked after loading our luggage into the trunk.
He spoke with an accent, which is the norm for Washington DC taxi drivers.
"We're here for the Alzheimer's Forum," I replied.
"Is it for research?" he asked.
"We'll hear about research," I said, "but we are here as advocates." It seems that everywhere I go, I run into someone who has a personal experience with Alzheimer's.
"My mother has Alzheimer's," he said.
"Some days she seems okay, but other days she makes up things.
She said that my sister and her husband got a divorce, and it wasn't true." "That can happen," I said.
"People with Alzheimer's get confused and think something is real when it isn't.
Sometimes they think someone is stealing from them." "Oh, yes," he said.
"My mother thinks that people are stealing from her." "Well," I said, "she probably misplaces things and can't remember where she put them so she thinks someone has stolen them.
Of course, there is always the chance that someone could be stealing from her, so you want to make sure it isn't true."  "They don't have a cure for Alzheimer's, do they?" he asked.
"No, they sure don't.
That's the reason we are here.
We talk to our legislators about research funding." Alzheimer's deaths increased sixty-five percent while deaths from other major diseases declined.
Once again, advocates from across the United States were at our nation's capitol trying to rally our senators and representatives to fund Alzheimer's research.
"My husband had an Alzheimer's type of dementia," I said.
"It wasn't Alzheimer's but the Alzheimer's Association helped me so much that I keep coming to DC each year."  The cabbie continued to ask questions about the disease affecting his seventy-seven-year-old mother.
He told us his mother had come to the US from Somalia.
"What is the difference between Alzheimer's and dementia?" he asked "You can think of dementia like an umbrella and beneath that umbrella are a lot of different diseases that cause dementia.
Alzheimer's is the main cause of dementia, but there are a lot of other diseases that can cause dementia, like Lewy Body disease, vascular dementia, or frontotemporal dementia." "Like an umbrella." He nodded his understanding.
"Yes," I said.
"Dementia is a general term for people with memory loss and who have trouble performing daily activities.
Different conditions cause dementia symptoms, including some that are reversible.
That's why it's important to have a complete medical workup." It always concerns me that someone will assume his loved one's memory loss is Alzheimer's when it might be a condition that can be treated.
"The doctor said my mother has Alzheimer's," he said.
"He said she didn't have thyroid or a vitamin deficiency." "It's good they checked those things out," I said.
We were pulling up to the hotel.
"Be sure to contact your local Alzheimer's Association chapter.
They can help you cope with the changes ahead." We settled the tab and as I stepped from the cab, I told him, "I wish you the best with your mom." He smiled and thanked me.
As I closed the door, my heart went out to the cab driver who had shared a slice of his life.
His story is repeated  millions of time throughout this country and has a predictable ending, at least for now.
Maybe someday I can share happier news with strangers I meet.
Copyright April 2012 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 16, 2012>
The April showers of a few nights ago morphed into a thunderstorm.
The booming thunder awakened me from a deep sleep.
There's something about the sound of thunder that leaves me feeling vulnerable, and a little sad.
I turned over to look at my clock and it was flashing on and off, off and on.
Since I didn't have to work the next morning, I didn't bother to set the clock and just went back to sleep.
Thunder boomed closer, and as I tossed in the other direction, I heard music.
Music?
Where could that be coming from?
I thought it might be my cell since I had left it in my purse, but the music kept playing.
I couldn't hear the tune well enough to tell what it was, but I knew there was no reason music would be playing in the middle of the night.
The sound of music was replaced with rolling thunder.
As I listened, the storm got louder and louder, rain pelted against the window, and I forgot about the music.
I used to be scared of storms, and Jim would hold me close when thunder came in the night.
He was fearless and tried to convince me there was no reason to be afraid.
That argument never gave me comfort when tornado watches turned to warnings.
The downside of spring is the storms that have passed through my life.
Our journey through the land of dementia ended on April 18, 2005 when Jim left this world.
Death rolled through our lives with the force of a tornado leaving an aftermath of eerie stillness behind.
You would think with the devastating tornadoes last year, I would still be afraid.
It was only the noise and not fear that kept me awake during the storm Thursday night.
As the storm faded into the night, I once again heard the faint sound of music.
Okay, it was obvious that I wasn't going to sleep until I figured out where the music was coming from.
I got up out of bed and wandered through the house, following the sound.
In the hallway, I recognized the melody: "Winter Wonderland." A few more steps, and I knew it was Brad Paisley singing.
I crossed the room and walked to over to the docking station and turned off my iPod.
I had to smile at a Christmas song competing with a spring thunderstorm.
On my way back to bed, I tried to reason how the iPod started up on its own.
So maybe a jolt of electricity triggered the on button.
Or maybe, there wasn't a logical explanation and it was a message.
A reminder that storms pass, and music can chase away the most ominous moods.
Copyright(c) April 2012 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com  
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 9, 2012>
It seems that every minute of the day fills me with an anxious feeling that I should be working on a project, or two, or three.
Sometimes I feel like I'm juggling burning batons of responsibility and if I don't keep tossing my hair is going to catch on fire.
This weekend was different.
After all, it was a holiday weekend, and one of those rare opportunities when my entire family was under my roof.
I figured emails, book orders, volunteer work, and that nagging little voice in my head that keeps saying, "you're getting farther behind," could just take a rest.
After breakfast of biscuits and gravy, we had an impromptu Easter egg hunt for the two youngest grandkids.
Since they were dressed in their Easter outfits and ready for church, we hid the plastic eggs in the living room.
During services this morning, the pastor asked the questions, "How many doors have you gone through this morning?" I'll have to admit, I've often thought of the symbolism of doors.
Jim always likened death to closing one door and opening another.
But physical doors--had I ever thought about that?
How many doors do I go through in the course of a day?
This house that Jim and I built has a lot of doors.
I pass through them time after time.
It seems that as I get older, I'm passing through them even more often when I realize I've forgotten something in another room.
In addition, this morning, I was almost to my car when I remembered my camera.
I into the house, picked up the camera and passed through the same door to go outside.
This afternoon, I spent about an hour working on an upcoming presentation.
With the sun shining brightly outside, I turned off the netbook and made a pitcher of tea.
I poured a glass and walked through the door to join my son, Eric, and daughter-in-law, Shawna, on the front porch.
"This is a perfect day," I said.
The thermometer showed nearly seventy degrees, and there wasn't a cloud in the sky.
We walked out into the yard to enjoy the warmth of the sunlight.
Birds chirped, squirrels barked, and a crow cawed loudly before he flew across the yard in a straight line toward the woods.
The phrase ran through my head, "as the crow flies." We talk about that when we are trying to describe not how we would make the journey, but the distance without those normal boundaries.
I noted that the crow actually flew in a straight line.
We meandered out onto the gravel road and started walking.
"You used to walk the dogs to the corner nearly every day," Eric said.
"Yes, I did," I said thinking about Bubba the huge, furry mixed-breed dog and Sherry the German shepherd.
Both dogs died years ago.
Bubba died from old age and Sherry died from grief a few months later.
After our walk, we sat on the front porch visiting and enjoying the peace and quiet.
Sunday was so unlike Easters of the past.
When Jim's parents were living, their house and yard overflowed with family.
The little kids would be kept inside while the older kids and adults hid hundreds of eggs--plastic eggs, hard-boiled eggs, peeps, chocolate foil wrapped eggs.
The kids would  rush outdoors with the biggest basket they could carry to gather Easter Goodies.
This Easter, we watched Katrina the cat chase a lizard.
We sat and visited like the old days except that the ding of cell phones interrupted the conversations as friends near and far checked in via text messaging, email, and Facebook.
After a few relaxing hours spent on the front porch, I carried the holiday feeling throughout the evening.
I didn't turn on the netbook and answer the annoying email I ignored yesterday.
I didn't work on the spreadsheet, place any orders, worry about my committee lists or corporate sponsors, or my taxes for that matter.
A holiday should allow time to sit and contemplate the significance of how many doors I pass through in the course of a day.
And on Easter Sunday, I enjoyed the gift of a perfect day when I indulged in the simple pleasure of sitting on the front porch with family.
Copyright April 2012 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 28, 2012>
Alzheimer's is a worldwide disease, and the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer's Network (DIAN) is focused on familial Alzheimer's that typically affects people in their thirties, forties, or fifties.
The Alzheimer's Association awarded a $4.2 million research grant to study this form of young onset Alzheimer's.
Studying hereditary Alzheimer's can speed up discovery of effective treatments, or hopefully, prevention.
Although inherited Alzheimer's is rare, it is the only truly predictable form of the disease.
When a parent has the genetic mutation that causes hereditary Alzheimer's, children have a 50/50 chance of developing the disease.
Genetic testing can determine whether a person will develop inherited Alzheimer's.
The Alzheimer's grant will be used to conduct experimental drug therapies internationally.
The participants will be those who are destined to develop Alzheimer's, but do not exhibit symptoms.
The hope is to develop therapies that prevent the disease from happening.
The eleven groups that make up the DIAN network are following 150 participants with familial Alzheimer's.
Researchers have discovered that measurable brain changes can appear as much as 20 years before symptoms.
Randy Bateman, MD, and associate professor of Neurology at Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, explained the importance of a network of research facilities.
"No single research center has sufficient numbers of people with dominantly inherited Alzheimer's to conduct a large enough study to generate meaningful data." I met Randy in Washington DC several years ago when he attended the Alzheimer's Action Summit and joined our Missouri group of advocates to visit our senators.
Randy was definitely an asset to our group.
We had our own researcher to share first-hand knowledge about treatments coming down the pipeline.
Although the genetic form of Alzheimer's affects only 1% of people with the disease, the ability to study this group before onset gives a sliver of hope to all people with Alzheimer's.
Anything that will speed up the time it takes for Alzheimer's disease therapy to become available to the public is good news.
Life is truly heartbreaking for those families dealing with familial Alzheimer's.
Even the ones who escape the disease through genetic roulette may have a parent, aunts and uncles, cousins, or siblings who develop the disease.
Sometimes the ones who do not develop the disease spend a lifetime caring for their relatives who do.
I recently received an email from  Jessica whose husband tested positive for familial Alzheimer's.
He has not yet developed the disease, but she is already worried about him and her children's future.
The emotional turmoil of that family is immeasurable.
My friend Karen took loving care of her husband Mike throughout his battle with inherited Alzheimer's.
He passed away in February, and now she is at loose ends.
"I thought I was ready, but it really hit me hard," she said.
Yes, Karen, I know exactly how you feel.
I don't think we can ever be ready to let go.
Caregiving becomes such a part of life that we adapt to the new reality and that becomes our way to put love into action.
Kudos to the Alzheimer's Association for providing research dollars to study this heartbreaking disease.
My sincere wish is that Randy and his cohorts will be able to use this research to find a way to prevent Jessica's or Karen's children from developing inherited Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) March 2012 L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 18, 2012>
I looked forward to St. Patrick's Day and expected a day of good old Irish fun.
Saturday would be a time to kickback and make the most of being Irish for a day.
After all, I only get to wear my green nail polish twice a year--Halloween and St. Patrick's Day.
I figure at that rate, the bottle will last until I'm at least 150.
My plans changed when Uncle Jimmy passed away.
His funeral was Saturday in Versailles where my mother lives.
While I was there, I planned to visit Mom and then drop by the nursing home to see my brother Donnie.
The day started out beautifully.
I left home dressed in green, of course, and wearing sandals.
Yes, sandals.
Here winter isn't even officially over, and I take off for the day in open toed shoes.
The luck of the Irish wasn't riding in the car with me.
The closer I got to Versailles, the darker the sky.
Rumbles of thunder, and streaks of lightning were followed by a downpour.
The wind picked up, driving the rain with the force of a robo wash.
I pulled off to a side road while first rain, then hail, pelted my car.
The storm passed, as storms always do, and I drove on.
The bittersweet nature of funerals is that although it is a sad occasion, it is also family time.
Many hugs later, the services began, and I remembered happier days.
Uncle Jimmy was a family recording historian, just like his namesake, my husband Jim.
Several years ago, they took over my living room for weeks while Uncle Jimmy used a projector to roll his old 8 mm film and Jim videotaped the old home movies.
They laughed and narrated, telling stories about the people pictured on the grainy black and white film.
After the funeral, Mom and I visited Donnie who was not having a good day.
The nurse injected his medication into the feeding tube, and he drifted off to sleep.
My mom sat on the edge of his bed, tears streaming down her face.
As we walked down the hallway, I said, "Mom, I think you need to do something to take your mind off this for a while.
Why don't I take you to the boat?" My mom loves to go to the casino and it always cheers her up.
This time, she just shrugged and said without enthusiasm, "Oh, if you want to go." I told Mom to call Aunt Lebetta and ask her to go.
"She needs cheering up too." My cousin Bonnie had just been diagnosed with lung cancer and further tests showed tumors in her brain.
After spending the morning at the hospital, Aunt Lebetta was inconsolable about the bad news that only seemed to get worse.
Mom called.
"She just doesn't think she can go."  "Tell her that you 'old hairpins' need to do something to get your minds off your problems," I said.
"Reta would expect me to do that." My cousin Reta coined the nickname "old hairpins" for her two beloved aunts.
"Bonnie is hallucinating," Aunt Lebetta said when she got in the car.
Bonnie told them that her dad, Uncle Melvon, had come to see her and told her not to be afraid.
Bonnie talked about seeing butterflies.
"You know what the butterflies are, don't you?" my mom asked.
"Melvon saw a butterfly come out of its cocoon once, and he said that is what death would be like--you come up out of your shell and fly away a beautiful butterfly." After a few hours at the casino, my mom and aunt showed me their winning tickets.
Since they seem to play until all the money is gone, I confiscated their tickets.
"I'll give these to you when we get ready to walk out the door," I said handing them each $20.
"When this is gone, we're leaving." They walked out with smiles on their faces, worries pushed aside for a few moments.
Today, the message at church was about the tribulations of Job.
Our minister told a story about a man who asked a good friend with terminal cancer, "How does it feel to know you're dying?" The friend answered with a question, "How does it feel to think you are not?" Driving home from church, I thought about how unfair life can be.
Nobody plans to have a terminal illness like Alzheimer's or cancer.
Life itself is terminal and just doesn't go according to plan.
No matter how Job-like life is, we can take comfort knowing that when the time comes we will rise up out of our ugly cocoons and emerge as beautiful butterflies.
Copyright (c) March 2012 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 12, 2012>
The latest Alzheimer's Association Fact Sheet gives hard data about the high cost of living with Alzheimer's disease.
The Fact Sheet begins with the statement:  The graying of America means the bankrupting of America - and Alzheimer's is a major reason why.
In 2012, caring for Alzheimer's will cost $200 billion.
Medicare and Medicaid take the brunt of these costs.
Medicare bears the largest share, $104.5 billion, and Medicaid is in second place with $35.5 billion.
Those who have a loved one with an Alzheimer's type of dementia know that although the government looks like the biggest loser on paper, families take a harder hit with both emotional and financial tolls.
More than 15 million caregivers provide 17 billion hours worth of unpaid caregiving.
The monetary value of this caregiving is $210 billion--the emotional cost cannot be measured.
Alzheimer's is not just an expensive disease; it is costly.
The highest costs are not in dollars, but in broken relationships as families and caregivers adjust to a new reality.
As hard as it is to provide care for a loved one with Alzheimer's, 60 percent of caregivers find emotional stress to be the hardest part of caregivng.
A third of caregivers report being depressed.
Alzheimer's caregivers have increased health problems directly related to being a caregiver.
Nationally, this translates into an additional $7.8 billion health care costs for the caregiver.
Have you hugged a caregiver today?
Better yet, have you offered help, and meant it?
I'm not talking about "If there's anything I can do..." without following up to find out what you really can do to help.
I'm referring to watching a loved one for a few hours to relieve the primary caregiver.
Family members should work out a schedule so that each member can contribute to the wellbeing of both the caregiver and the person with dementia.
A woman I met a few years ago thought it was totally her dad's responsibility to look after her mother.
After all, he was the one who promised to care for her "in sickness and in health." She stubbornly refused to help her dad.
To be perfectly honest, I felt like shaking her, but instead I encouraged her to take on more responsibility for her mother's care.
She did finally help after her dad was hospitalized from the stress of caring for his wife.
I've seen families pull together for the good of the person with Alzheimer's.
It takes more than one person to provide 24-hour-a-day care.
I was lucky that Jim's family, my family, and our family were available and willing to help.
I could not possibly have kept Jim home as long as I did without this family support.
Not all families work as a team, some are shattered by arguments over caregiving, or even whether their family member has dementia.
Denial is common and it is hard to acknowledge that someone you love could have a disease that could erase memories.
No matter how drastically a person with dementia may change, they can still feel your love.
As hard as being a caregiver is, and although it may seem a thankless job at times, your reward comes from knowing that you've done your very best.
That is something that will stick with you long after your loved one is gone, and you can look back with no regrets.
Copyright (c) March 2012 by L.S.
Fisher www.earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 4, 2012>
Wednesday was Memory Day and hundreds of advocates converged on the Missouri State Capitol.
After being briefed on the issue we were to discuss with our legislators, we donned our purple Alzheimer's Association "beauty queen" banners and set off to deliver packets.
My favorite part of Memory Day is meeting with other advocates who have become my friends over the years.
Along with people that I expected to see, I noted a familiar face in the group surrounding Linda Newkirk, the executive director of the Mid-Missouri Chapter.
"Aren't you in the wrong group?" I asked Evelyn a fellow Business Women of Missouri member.
"I've been involved in the walk for years," she said as I gave her a hug.
This wasn't the first trip to Memory Day for either of us, but somehow this was the first time we had noticed each other.
Before heading out to our appointments, we helped honor some members of our state government who have moved our cause forward.
First up was Lt. Govenor Peter Kinder who served as the chairman of the Missouri Alzheimer's Plan Task Force.
An executive summary of this plan was included in the packet for the legislators.
This report crafted by the 19-member task force gives some of the highlights of the past year.
The Missouri Alzheimer's chapters awarded Leadership of the Year Awards to Senator Kurt Schaefer and Representative Margo McNeill.
Patti, Janie and I had to leave before the ceremony ended to be on time for our first appointment.
We had only one priority this year: increase the Alzheimer's Service Grants to $300,000.
In 2006, we received $539,000.
This was reduced 25% in 2010, and this year's budgeted amount is $150,000.
These grant funds were used by the Missouri Chapters to provide respite care for families with loved ones living at home.
I can speak from experience about the importance of respite funding.
The only financial help we qualified for was respite from our local chapter.
Jim was too young to qualify for any of the senior services that are in place to help the elderly.
Most of the legislators were sympathetic to our request to reinstate Service Grants, but as one aide put it, "Tell us where the money is going to come from and we might consider it." I'm sure they have groups knocking on their door every day asking for more funding, or at least to not have funding cut.
It seems like senior services are often the first items to hit the chopping block.
I was more impressed with my representative, Calib Jones, who took time to sit and talk with us, although he was on his way to a committee meeting.
After we explained the shortfall, he said, "I'm not on the budget committee, but I'll certainly talk to someone who is." It would seem to be a logical choice to fund respite to help caregivers keep their loved ones at home longer.
Sixty percent of Missourians placed in nursing homes depend on Medicaid to pay for their care.
Isn't it more logical to spend $2.45 per year for each of the 110,000 Missourians who have Alzheimer's than it is to spend on the average more than $51,000 per person for nursing home care?
With nursing home care calculated at roughly $140 per day, if 307 people delayed going into a nursing home for one week, the state would break even.
After a whirlwind of visits, we went outside and lined up on the steps for a photo op.
The strong wind not only sent hair flying out of control, but nearly gusted some of the advocates right off the steps.
I was tired after the visits and my feet hurt.
On the walk back to my hotel room, I thought about how necessary it is to get boots on the ground for such an important service.
Hopefully, the economics of providing respite care make sense to the legislators, and when they vote on the budget they will remember purple banners and the advocates who came to visit on Memory Day 2012.
Copyright (c) March 2012 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 22, 2012>
February is heart month.
First, we have Valentine's Day with heart-shaped reminders of love, and our thoughts turn to romance.
With romantic love, sometimes the heart and brain may not seem to be connected.
Our brain may tell us that we should or should not love someone, while a recalcitrant heart leads us in a different direction.
I attended an annual event Saturday that is much more geared to health than a box of Valentine candy--Go Red for Women.
The room was filled with a veritable sea of ladies dressed in red.
Sally Lockett, a local businesswoman, pulls this event together each year.
We were entertained by a fashion show of vintage red dresses while we dined on a yummy, heart-healthy lunch.
Being so involved with the Alzheimer's Association, I have long been aware that what is healthy for your heart is good for your brain.
A healthy diet and exercise benefits both the heart and the brain.
The Alzheimer's Association and the Centers for Disease Control collaborated on a report about the heart/brain connection.
The Healthy Brain Initiative: A National Public Roadmap for Maintaining Cognitive Health lays the groundwork to promote brain health.
Vascular health and cognitive health are intertwined.
The Initiative's goal: "To maintain or improve the cognitive performance of all adults." When you think about it, a healthy body improves quality of life.
We would all rather be active throughout our lifetimes that suffer from declining health.
When we indulge in unhealthy activities are risk factors for heart disease, mental decline, cancer, and numerous other issues that can go wrong as we age.
Smoking, excessive drinking, overeating, or sedentary lifestyles can creep up on us as a major problem that predicts a bleak future instead of the one that we want.
Maybe we can't change everything at once about our lives but right now is a good time to set personal goals to work toward heart health and improve our chances of maintaining cognitive throughout the years ahead.
Good for your heart--and also good for your brain: * Exercise!
Get up off the couch and move.
* Increase your nutritious food intake.
Yes, I said increase.
Fill up on fruits, vegetables, fish and lean poultry, and whole grains.
You'll eat a lot less unhealthy food.
You can lose weight without going hungry.
* Drink in moderation.
* Don't smoke.
If you smoke, quit.
It's healthier for you and everyone around you.
* Learn healthy methods of relaxation--meditation, exercise, massages to name a few.
* Exercise your brain by working puzzles, playing games, taking a class, reading, writing, or any activity that allows you to hone your cognitive skills.
* Increase social interaction--spend time with friends and family, church family, or volunteer.
* Good dental health is important.
Get regular checkups and floss every day.
The list gives me ideas for ways I can personally reduce risk of developing debilitating conditions, but I haven't been able to get my act together.
When I had my gym membership, after my workout I was so hungry I couldn't resist drive-thru windows.
Now that I'm eating healthier, I don't exercise enough.
I've managed to lose ten pounds by making better food choices and that in turn is snowballing into improving my overall health.
Imagine my surprise when I went in to have my follow up endoscopy and the nurse asked, "Is your blood pressure always that low?" It was low enough that I hadn't even recognized the numbers as blood pressure.
I'm a work in progress.
My goal now is to make sure that I progress in the right direction.
I know that if I put my heart into it, I can do it.
Copyright (c) 2012 L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 11, 2012>
In their quest for the key to unlock the mystery of Alzheimer's, researchers are taking a closer look at tau.
The hallmarks of Alzheimer's are plaques of the protein beta amyloid and tangles of the protein tau.
Just exactly what causes the plaques and tangles are somewhat of a mystery, as is their exact role in the disease.
Most research has been on ways to eliminate plaques, but a study at Columbia University Medical Center, New York, delved into how tau tangles spread in the brain.
Of course, this study was not done on humans--it was based on tau introduced into the frontal lobes of mice.
The valuable insight from this study is that tau appears to spread like a virus, or cancer, jumping from neuron to neuron, across synapses, and spreading to other parts of the brain.
This discovery is a clue.
According to Dr. Scott A.
Small, co-author of the article published in  PLoS One, this discovery indicates that in the future early detection and treatment could be used to stop the spread of tau in the human brain.
Small said, "It is during this early stage that the disease will be most amenable to treatment.
That is the exciting clinical promise down the road." Another article published in the February issue of Science Express also compares the spread of Alzheimer's disease to cancer.
In fact, this is a study of how the cancer drug bexarotene has cleared the beta amyloid protein (plaques) from test animals by increasing ApoE.
Cognitive function in the mouse models improved.
This is an already developed and tested drug so the process of determining what dose levels would be effective in humans to treat Alzheimer's may move somewhat faster.
The study has a cautionary note for caregivers of people with Alzheimer's to not ask doctors to prescribe bexarotene for Alzheimer's.
This is an unapproved use of the drug.
I'm not sure why, but for some reason as I reviewed these two articles, I was reminded of a book I read when I was a teenager called Flowers for Algernon.
Maybe it was all the talk about experiments on laboratory mice and the way success may not necessarily translate to humans.
In Daniel Keye's book, the story is a series of journal entries written by Charlie, a man with an IQ of 68, who has the same experimental surgery that improved the intelligence of the laboratory mouse, Algernon.
After the surgery, Charlie's IQ skyrockets to genius level.
The surgery on Charlie and Algernon has the complete appearance of success--that is until Algernon begins to decline mentally and dies.
Charlie's decline is as sure as Algernon's, but he requests flowers be placed on Algernon's grave.
Just like in Algernon, success in mice doesn't necessarily mean success in humans, but it is a start.
By attacking the hallmarks of Alzheimer's, these two scientific studies show new approaches to stopping Alzheimer's in its tracks.
Science moves slowly and it will be many more years before this discovery will translate to an effective treatment for the 5.4 million Americans with Alzheimer's.
The goal set during review of the National Alzheimer's Plan is to prevent and effectively treat Alzheimer's disease by 2025.
Although thirteen years seems like a long time, it would be worth the wait if we can place flowers on the grave of Alzheimer's--not on the graves of those who die from the disease.
Copyright (c) February 2012 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 3, 2012>
My Mom on Her 85th Birthday A family is a circle of love that surrounds your heart.
If you are from a large family, you may not see some of your relatives for years at a time.
Unfortunately, it seems like funerals are the prime place to see cousins, aunts, uncles, brothers and sisters.
I've had two chances to connect with family members in the past week.
As tradition would have it, the first family get-together was a funeral.
Aunt Mable was Jim's aunt, and when I called her "Mable" she corrected me.
"I'm Aunt Mable," she said in her gruff tone.
I never made that mistake again.
After spending more time with Aunt Mable, I realized she played an important role in many lives.
In addition to her own large family, she opened her heart and home to nieces and nephews who needed a surrogate mom.
Aunt Mable developed Alzheimer's during her last years.
It was heartbreaking for her children to visit her knowing that some days she would not recognize them.
Her funeral was a lovely celebration of her life, and Aunt Mable would have been pleased to see the hugs shared between family members that had been separated for too long.
I had planned to attend the visitation and not stay for the services, but when I sat next to Uncle Jewell and Aunt Mary, I just couldn't leave.
Seeing them brought back memories of many fun weekends together.
We went on fishing trips, to bluegrass festivals, or sometimes we had big jam sessions at our house.
I remember one time we went to the Truman Dam Visitors' Center.
Uncle Jewell was clowning around so much that people began to follow him around mistaking him for a paid entertainer.
My Mom, Lula Capps, Playing Music Funerals are a bittersweet connection with family, but birthday parties are much more upbeat.
Saturday, we celebrated my mom's 85th birthday at an intimate gathering of more than a hundred relatives and close friends.
The party took place at the Ambush, once a favorite honky-tonk in Morgan County.
It is past its heyday, but judging from the cars and people crowding into the restaurant and bar, it made a one-night comeback.
With a family the size of ours, not everyone was able to make it.
As I looked at my sons and their families, I couldn't help but compare my childhood to theirs.
I'm not even sure how many first cousins I have, but my oldest grandkids have only two first cousins, and my youngest grandkids only three.
During my growing up years, my cousins were my playmates and best friends.
We collectively share memories of playing endless games at grandma and grandpa's house on lazy summer Saturdays.
During the evening hours, we chased fireflies while mom and my uncles played guitars and sang country or gospel songs.
At the party, my brother, Jimmy, and a friend took the stage to play music.
My mom, true to her normal age-defying behavior, joined my brother for a while to play her guitar and sing with him.
Later, two of my Fisher family nephews and their group played.
In my mind's eye, I could see Jim smiling to see his family tradition carried on by a younger generation.
As the evening wore down, my brother announced that they were going to sing one last song.
After a variety of country, southern rock, and beer-drinking music, they closed with a gospel song.
Voices blended as family members, young and old, sang the praiseful words of "How Great Thou Art."  As we hugged our farewells, we remained optimistic that our next family gathering would be a happy occasion and goodbye, a temporary break in the family circle.
Copyright February 2012 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 18, 2012>
Today I was cleaning out a file that I had forgotten existed.
It was simply marked "Alzheimer's" which covers a lot of territory.
This particular file contained an assortment of national and chapter newsletters, various newspaper clippings, brochures, notes and letters from Mid-Missouri staff, and miscellaneous odds, ends, and memorabilia.
The file had been untouched for the past five years.
It was a letter I had written to our family physician that transported me back in time.
I had no recollection of writing the letter and read it with fresh eyes.
The letter began with "I have made arrangements with...Guest Home to provide daycare for Jim two days a week beginning in February.
For some time I have not wanted to leave Jim by himself during the day while I work.
His mother has been keeping an eye on him and preparing his meals for him.
Jim no longer has a driver's license and cannot dial a telephone.
It is really hard to know what he will be able to do from day to day as his dementia progresses." To this point, I'm wondering why I wrote his doctor this letter.
"If I can get him to cooperate, daycare will be good for him.
He doesn't really do anything during the day besides watch TV.
I think the stimulation of being around other people would be good for Jim.
I also worry about his mom being so tied down with him and not being able to do a lot of things she likes to do.
I also need a backup plan in case his mom would be unable to watch him.
I am hoping that daycare will provide us with enough relief that we can keep Jim at home as long as possible." As I read on, the purpose of the letter came to light.
"I think if you suggest that he go somewhere during the day to get out of the house and be around other people, he will do it.
I don't know if I will be able to convince him that it would be for his own benefit, but I think he will listen to you." With the doctor's help, we convinced Jim to give eldercare a try.
The place I chose was on my way to work and I could just drop him off.
After the first day, he didn't want to go back.
I remember pleading with him to go and he balked, but eventually I loaded him into the van.
I felt much like a parent dropping off a child at the babysitters.
Jim took his guitar with him and spent the day in an out-of-the-way spot playing the same song over and over.
He didn't socialize with anyone or participate in any of the bingo or card games the elderly residents played.
After a few short weeks at daycare, the Guest Home called me and told me they were terminating his care.
It seems he picked up his guitar and walked out the door.
He had made it to the highway before a staff member missed him and went after him.
They just couldn't be responsible for someone who wandered off.
I had already decided that the daycare arrangement wasn't working for Jim or me.
He was stubbornly insisting he didn't want to go "today" every time I tried to take him.
It just wasn't working out the way I had envisioned.
The next step was in-home care.
That presented a new set of problems due to a high turnover with the service and the last minute calls with excuses why the designated caregiver couldn't come that particular day.
Some days no one showed up and the service didn't know why.
It seemed that they never had a substitute available.
A little over a year after I wrote the letter, I placed Jim in long-term care.
We had run out of options, and he needed twenty-four hour supervision.
The letter brought back a rush of emotions.
For a few short minutes, I relived the depression, frustration, and responsibility of being a primary caregiver searching for solutions to an ever-shifting kaleidoscope of problems.
I put the letter away with the other memories in the file folder that I couldn't toss into the trash.
As I replaced the letter I noticed the date at the top: January 18, 1999.
The letter was written thirteen years ago today.
It seems more like another lifetime, another me.
Copyright (c) January 2012 L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 7, 2012>
I started the New Year out right by attending a Jennifer Yazell presentation.
Jennifer, CEO of Golden Egg Communication, is a dynamic speaker capable of motivating a die-hard pessimist.
Jennifer teaches that you get more of whatever you focus on.
It is logical that if you focus on the positive, you become more motivated.
One of the tools she used to drive home the point was a film clip called "Red Cars." As the driver of a red Chevy Malibu, I understood this video perfectly.
When I bought a red car, I began to notice other red cars.
Every time I drove into a Walmart parking lot, it seemed like everyone was driving a red car.
Sometimes I had to push my horn-honking button to figure out which red car was mine.
One day I walked out of Walmart carrying a bag of groceries and pushed the unlock button as I approached my red car.
I opened the door and started to put my groceries in the back seat, but a vacuum sweeper was in my way.
I immediately realized that either the vacuum fairy had visited my vehicle, or I was trying to put my groceries in the wrong red Malibu.
Apparently, I was a little too focused on red cars in general and not my car in particular.
Of course, red cars aren't the most important focus in my life.
I firmly believe focusing on the positive gave me inner peace that became my lifeline when Jim developed dementia.
Some chunks of time are so challenging that even Polly Anna would pop anti-depressants.
If your loved one has Alzheimer's, you may wake up each morning with the sense that something is out of balance and dread facing the day.
Alzheimer's is most assuredly a depressing and sad disease over which you have no control.
Either your doctor tells you the prognosis or a few Google searches later, you learn the eventual outcome.
Alzheimer's takes years or even decades to run its course.
It's hard to retain optimism, but if you become overwhelmed by the negative implications of an Alzheimer's prognosis, the disease has claimed two victims.
When the doctor diagnosed Jim with dementia of the Alzheimer's type, it was the most crushing moment in our lives.
Once we got past the initial shock, we survived on denial for a while.
Eventually, we recognized that the disease was progressively taking over our lives.
As we adjusted to our new reality, the darkness lifted.
We began to focus on activities we could still enjoy together and not on the disease.
Because of that change in focus, we made the most of the reprieve given to us during the early stages.
I won't try to convince you that suddenly everything was okay.
Dementia is a series of losses and the grieving process is ongoing.
The key to survival is to focus on the positive, and find ways to take control of your attitude.
The diagnosis was a turning point in our lives, but it wasn't all negative.
Before Jim was diagnosed, my life consisted of getting up in the mornings, going to work, coming home at night preparing dinner, watching TV or reading a book, going to bed and start all over the next day.
After the diagnosis, I contacted the Alzheimer's Association.
Before I knew it, I joined a support group, coordinated the Memory Walk in our town, became a local and national Alzheimer's advocate, and gave presentations to civic groups.
My circle of friends grew exponentially.
Instead of feeling sorry for myself, volunteering became my "red car." By focusing on others, I received the gifts of friendship and purpose.
I'm not saying I wake up each day and jump out of bed with enthusiasm.
Sometimes I can be a grump until I've had my morning coffee.
I do normally wake up with a mental list of events, activities, or potential accomplishments for the day.
In fact, often my To-Do list cannot be completed in one day, one week, or one month.
That doesn't discourage me.
After all, it is a New Year and I predict that every item I focus on will be finished before the end of the year.
Copyright (c) January 2012, L.S.
Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 24, 2011>
During the holidays, news abounds about those generous people who have holiday hearts and give away donations to complete strangers.
Secret Santas pop up all over the place, and we hear heartwarming stories about them giving away $100 bills.
I witnessed a Secret Santa type of moment at Cracker Barrel a few weeks ago.
An elderly gentleman tried to pay for his dinner and the waitress said, "You don't owe anything." "What?" he said.
"Where's my bill?" "It's already paid," she said loudly as she leaned closer so he could hear.
"The couple sitting at that table," she pointed to show him, "paid for your meal.
They are already gone." The elderly man seemed a little puzzled, but he sat and leisurely drank another cup of coffee.
I thought he might have taken the extra time to assure himself that he really didn't owe anything.
The couple that paid for his meals had holiday hearts--the good kind.
I would like to alert caregivers to a different type of holiday heart that physicians nationwide are talking about on television.
It seems that a combination of overeating, the stress of the holidays, and partying can create havoc with your heart.
People who don't normally drink tend to overindulge during the holidays.
My son refers to New Year's Eve as "amateur night" in reference to people who don't know their alcohol consumption limit.
After the chaos of planning and pulling off a holiday party, it may seem like the perfect way to relax and enjoy.
For some, the consequences can be frightening and life threatening.
The symptoms of holiday heart syndrome: You feel lightheaded and dizzy.
You are short of breath.
Your heart beats faster than normal and you have an irregular heartbeat.
If you experience these symptoms, cardiac specialists recommend that you stop drinking alcohol and drink cold water to rehydrate yourself.
Coughing also helps to reset the heart's rhythm.
If these symptoms don't go away within ten to fifteen minutes, it is time to call 911.
You may think this seems overdramatic for a little drinking and overeating, but the holidays are primetime for a heart attack.
Five percent more people die from heart-related deaths during the holidays especially on Christmas Day, the day after Christmas, and New Year's Day.
Drinking is not the only problem.
Overeating causes its own set of heart threatening risk factors for those who may have underlying heart disease.
An increase in fat and sodium can put a strain on the heart that can lead to a heart attack.
Moderation in food and drink will keep your holidays merrier, not to mention healthier.
It will also make that New Year's resolution to lose weight more attainable if you don't gain that extra five or ten pounds during the holiday season.
Here's a non-alcoholic toast that your holiday heart is healthy and filled with joy and generosity.
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 19, 2011>
My mom and I sat at the kitchen table drinking coffee, and I had just finished relating the strangest of many dreams I had the night before.
My granddaughter sat in a chair between us reading a book.
"I wonder why I have such strange dreams," I said.
"I can tell you, Grandma Linda," my granddaughter said.
She flipped the pages of the Why?
book she was reading and proceeded to answer my question.
"Scientists think that you dream as your brain tries to make sense of all the things you've done and felt during the day." "Sounds right to me," I said.
"I do and feel a lot each day and half the time I can't make sense of it." The Why?
book has been around my house for years and has passed down from grandchild to grandchild.
It answers a lot of the "why" questions that kids ask and adults can't answer.
The book even answers the question my oldest grandson asked me many years ago.
I picked him up from the babysitters and from the backseat he asked, "Grandma Linda, why is the sky blue?" I was stumped for an answer.
That was before I bought the Why?
book.
It has Bathtime Questions, Supermarket Questions, Nighttime Questions, Kitchen Questions, Farm Animal Questions, and Outdoor Questions, including "Why is the sky blue?" The book doesn't have any Health Questions, and doesn't answer why a person develops Alzheimer's or a related dementia.
I guess you can't expect a children's book to answer questions that dedicated researchers cannot answer.
Sure, in some cases, early onset Alzheimer's can be attributed to a genetic cause.
Later onset Alzheimer's is usually blamed on a risk factor such as age.
I guess the biggest "why" question that plagues me is why did Jim develop dementia at forty-nine?
Why was his life cut short by a disease so rare that I had never heard of it until the neurologist read the autopsy report?
The answers to these questions stump me more that my grandson's question about the color of the sky.
Our lives were on track headed in the right direction until dementia derailed the train.
We had made it through the hard times and were looking forward to traveling, spending time with family, spoiling our grandkids, and sitting on the front porch drinking coffee.
The house was filled with noise and laughter once again when our family was here for the annual Christmas get-together.
I was reminiscing about how rarely this happens now, but we used to have a full house on a regular basis.
I never knew when Jim would come home and say he was having a jam session, and oh-by-the-way they'll all be eating dinner with us.
Times were certainly different then.
Life changes.
People pass though my life, and I lose touch with beloved family and friends.
Years can pass without seeing people I once saw on a daily basis.
New friends enter my life to renew hope and soothe my spirit.
I am fortunate, indeed, to be a member of a loving and supportive family.
Through it all, I sometimes wonder why life turns out the way it does, and how certain events fit into the master plan.
When I look at my sons and grandchildren, I know that flight to Hawaii exactly forty-two years ago to marry Jim was part of my life's master plan.
The "why" questions of life may have more than one correct answer.
The sky may be blue because clear light is made up of all the colors of the rainbow and the blue light waves that bounce back are the ones you see.
Or, the answer might be the one I gave my grandson to the question he asked just as I drove past Hopewell Church.
"I'm sure there's a scientific reason, but I don't remember what it is.
Maybe it is blue because God made it that way." Some of the "why" questions of life cannot be found in any book and can only be answered through divine inspiration.
Copyright (c) December 2011http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 13, 2011>
Holiday Lights in Branson We all hold tightly to traditions that lift our spirits.
Some holidays are so special they create golden glows in our memories.
It may be challenging to remain joyful about the holidays if you are a primary caregiver for a loved one with dementia.
Much of the season may be spent running interference between your loved one and relatives, friends, or neighbors that just don't get it.
You may need to make adjustments to protect your loved one and your sanity.
With careful planning, even these difficult times may seem like small miracles on your own street.
After spending ten holiday seasons as a primary caregiver, I had time to learn how to survive the holidays.
I would like to share a few tips I learned--mostly from trial and error.
Keep      it Simple.
Less is better in all things      holiday.
Just because you have a thousand points of light, don't string      them everywhere.
Avoid going overboard with decorations, food, and      celebrations.
Don't      Shop Till You Drop.
Slash your gift list to      immediate family.
Consider the advantages of shopping online or purchasing      gift cards.
If you enjoy shopping, find someone to stay with your loved      one and plan a weekend away.
Shop.
Relax.
Shop.
Relax.
Repeat the relaxing      as often as necessary.
Strive      for Peace and Joy.
Go back to the basics and the reason for the      season.
Read inspiring holiday stories.
You can enjoy a tin of popcorn and      watch a movie on TV.
If your loved one can't make it to the grandchildren's      holiday program, have mom or dad record it and watch it at home.
Jingle      Bells.
Enjoy traditional Christmas music      with your loved one.
You may love the Trans-Siberian Orchestra, but your      loved one will more likely enjoy "White Christmas" or even "Frosty the      Snowman." Music can trigger happy memories.
Keep      Traditions You Love.
Only you know which traditions      you keep because you enjoy them.
If you spend hours baking or making candy      just because everyone expects you to do it--stop!
Allow      More Time.
When you are a caregiver, it just      takes more time to get things done.
You will want to avoid getting      frazzled and cranky because you ran out of time.
Plan ahead and let your      loved one with dementia help you.
How about letting her slather icing on      sugar cookies?
Does it really matter if they are perfect?
Maybe he would      like to stick bows or nametags on packages for the grandkids.
Give      the Gift of Love.
If you are so stressed out      trying to make the holidays perfect for everyone, you forget the most      important thing.
Slow down, take a deep breath, laugh and find happiness      in the moment.
Remember the greatest gift of all is love.
In the early stages, I would drive Jim around town to look at the holiday lights.
In the late stages, Jim would spend hours looking at the little fiber optic tree I put in his room at the nursing home.
Feeding him on Christmas day is, believe it or not, a memory I cherish.
I remember holding his hand while we watched the little tree whirl round and round and listened to the same Christmas songs we sang in elementary school.
Even the most poignant times have turn into precious memories.Copyright Dec 2011 L.S.
Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 5, 2011>
Don't you just hate it when you go to the doctor and he tells your problem is because you are getting old?
Well, he most likely will use a euphemism like, "As we get older..." and then fill in the blank with whatever has gone wrong now.
The health issue that took me to the doctor a few weeks ago--just at the end of the year when I had not used one penny of my high deductible insurance--was a problem with swallowing.
For quite some time, I had noticed that my food felt like it was caught in my esophagus, but I was doing a great job of convincing myself that it was only a minor problem until a bite of bagel hurt so much going down that it brought tears to my eyes.
I knew this was not going to be an easy or cheap fix.
We went down this road with Jim when he developed problems swallowing because of his dementia.
It was something we struggled with throughout his disease.
In the later stages, Jim was put on mechanically softened foods and then eventually on pureed food.
I think by that time, it distressed me more than it did him.
I hated that he couldn't eat the things that he had always loved.
So, I knew a little bit about swallowing problems, not my own, but Jim's.
After contemplating the situation, I just felt like this wasn't a problem that was going away on its own.
I had barely walked into the doctor's office when they told me step on the scales.
After seeing those numbers, it reminded me that I need a new battery for my scales so I can keep a closer eye on the pounds I'm packing on.
After my blood pressure check, the doctor listened to lungs and my latest complaint.
He explained how "when we get older" the esophagus narrows, which makes it hard to swallow food and move it to the stomach where it belongs.
It's a fairly easy fix.
After explaining that they just stretched the esophagus, my family doctor ordered an endoscopy.
Between my other commitments and vacation, the doctor that was to perform the scope and I couldn't easily find a date that worked for both of us.
Three weeks passed before the day our schedules meshed.
The endoscopy didn't require any prep, just lay off the food and drink after midnight.
I would sleep through the whole procedure or at least be so loopy that I just wouldn't care.
The procedure took about seven minutes--everything else took about two hours.
I could hear them talking while they worked and I heard the word "ulcers," and something about biopsies, another scope, and then things got a little fuzzy.
Later, I learned that I had ulcers in my esophagus, and a hiatal hernia.
I still haven't had my follow-up appointment with my family doctor, but I'm trying to eat things that go down easy.
In the meantime, I'm trying to follow a recommended diet that says you should eat enough food to get nutrition, but not a lot at one time.
It has lists of what to eat (oatmeal, applesauce, yogurt, fish, chicken, etc.
along with low-fat everything) and what to avoid (cabbage, broccoli, corn, tomatoes and tomato products--and worse yet chocolate and caffeine).
I'm working on changing some of my eating habits, but I can't bring myself to cancel my morning coffee and pray the doctor doesn't tell me to quit chocolate.
I've decided not to panic until I hear the details tomorrow about the doctor recommended diet.
Hopefully, it won't be as strict as the one I found on the Internet and won't last forever.
Copyright (c) Dec 2011 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 24, 2011>
The best holidays are a marriage of tradition and new tradition.
A traditional holiday can cause unnecessary grief and stress when a loved one has dementia.
The family get-together that used to the highlight of the year can become the most depressing day of the year.
Our holidays were always split between Jim's family and mine.
Thanksgiving was the time my family gathered at the old home place for turkey, dressing, gravy, pumpkin pie, and all the side dishes and trimmings.
After dinner, the kids (big and small) would go outside to mill around and maybe play a game of touch football.
One year, Jim videotaped the game.
Ever the showoff with his video skills, he brought it inside and played it on my mom and dad's TV.
We were all laughing at the game until my dad yelled, "Oh, my god!
That's my new tree," when a couple of kids scuffled over the ball taking the spindly sapling to the ground.
The old home place groaned when filled with eight of us "kids" and our families, Mom and Dad, and the invitees that didn't have a family dinner of their own.
We felt sorry for those folks and thought that with the size of our family, it would never happen to us.
Even the most distant cousin was a welcome guest at our traditional dinner.The first time I went to the dinner alone was when the reality set in that Thanksgiving dinner would never be the same.
Jim was in the nursing home, and I knew the more than hour drive and crowd of rowdy family would no longer be a pleasant experience for him.
It was a long lonely drive but once I arrived, the family time was worth the change in tradition.Eventually, my family decided to rotate homes for the annual get-together and changed the time to September.
We were on our own for Thanksgiving for the first time in decades.
After my mother-in-law passed, my other home for the holidays was gone.
My kids, in the meantime, had both developed their own traditions.
The past few years, I've enjoyed a traditional thanksgiving with my friend who was on his own after his mom passed away.
The holiday has been different, but with the Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade, some of it seemed the same.
It was still Turkey Day--for days on end.
More like Turkey Week.
How much turkey can two people eat?
Isn't it time for a new tradition?
You bet.
This year we are grilling steak.
Sometimes, a nontraditional holiday can take on a life of its own and possibly become a new tradition.
We can enjoy the meal without the aftermath of enough food to feed an army.
Cleanup will be easy and we will have more time to be thankful for all the blessings life has brought our way.
A little non-tradition may be the pumpkin pie spice of life you need to bring joy back into your holidays.
Maybe a little less reflection on what used to be and more hopeful thought to new possibilities.
I hope you find peace and happiness during the holidays regardless of how you celebrate.
Copyright (c) November 2011 by L.S.
Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com  
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 11, 2011>
I've attended a couple of great seminars lately on time management.
Both presenters touted organization as a key to save search time and increase leisure time.
Well, organization does help, I suppose.
It really irks me to have to figure out where I put something so that it will be "easy to find" when I need it.
One of Jim's favorite sayings was "Right here, but I can't find it." Sometimes he referred to not being able to find the correct words to say what he meant, or he could be looking for an object.
I helped him look for a lot of items even when he wasn't able to tell me exactly what he wanted to find.
In my job, I have a spacious office, but I have to handle a vast amount of paper.
My two file cabinets are jam-packed and with several different projects going at the same time, I have stacks of paper.
Most of the time, if I'm looking for a particular piece of paper, I know which stack to search.
I'm starting to think that when I go home at night, my papers play musical stacks.
When searching for a particularly slippery piece of paper, I might feel like it's right here, but I can't find it.
Another time management tool I learned lately was to organize a To-Do list by priority.
If something has to be done that day, you place an "A" next to it.
A task that doesn't have an urgent deadline, but must be done soon, is put on the "B" list.
Anything else is put on a different list that you check from time to time when you catch up on your "A" and "B" lists, or if you are just totally freaked, and need something less stressful to do.
I've always been a believer in a To-Do list, especially if I can find time to list the things I need to do.
Lately, I've graduated to a To-Do book for my personal life.
I'm not joking about that either.
I have a small, but thick, notebook that with the words "To-Do" marked boldly on the outside.
Now, if I'd only remember to look at it every day.
Should I put that reminder on the To-Do list?
One of the suggestions I came away with from the last seminar is to take a few minutes of quiet time at the end of the day and list the "A" and "B" tasks for the next day.
Some days this works well and I leave work confident that I'm in control of my own work destiny.
Other times, total chaos rules and, just like yesterday, I'm frantically pushing against a deadline--everything goes wrong, and at the end of the day I'm  trying to finish up just one or two more important "A" items that I didn't have time to list.
With today a holiday and Monday my day off, my Tuesday "A" list consists of two folders and three pieces of paper in the middle of my desk weighted down with a stapler.
Actually, that might be my "A+" list since I have to be prepared for the monthly board meeting by nine o'clock.
With my involvement in three organizations, writing, publishing, and a day job, my goal is to squeeze in some recreational time and, more importantly, family time.
While my head is spinning with all that I have to do, I am shocked that my grandson is graduating from high school and filling out scholarship applications.
Where has the time gone?
It seems like only yesterday that his Grandpa Jim sang cowboy songs to him while I held him on my lap.
I  realize now that I don't manage time; time manages me.
Copyright (c) November 2011 L.S.
Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 31, 2011>
The Sedalia Democrat hosted a Tribute in honor of the 50th Anniversary of the Vietnam War.
Leading up to the event, Latisha Koetting tracked down family member to tell the stories of the men whose names are inscribed on the Vietnam Memorial on the courthouse lawn.
I've been saving the newspaper stories because the stories of these young men tug at my heart.
During the course of the event, three local veterans told their stories.
James "Smitty" Smith told about adopting a daughter while serving in Vietnam.
He spoke of his struggles to go though different embassies and how surprised he was that he had to take the baby out of the orphanage.
He found a place for them to live until eventually he sent the baby home with another soldier.
His daughter Teresa, who works for homeland security, was present and spoke about how she owed her existence to the Vietnam War and how grateful she was to her mom and dad.
Jim Clark told a humorous account of his time in Vietnam although he had serious injuries.
He said that he liked to tell tall tales sometimes so he told a friend one time about the day he was injured.
He was in a field without cover and he spoke of trying to hide behind a watermelon.
His story was that he took out his knife and cut the buttons off his shirt.
"Why did you do that," he said his friend asked.
Clark's answer, "So I could get lower to the ground." The final speaker, Gregg Davis, spoke of living through the loss of his legs and other injuries.
He told of how his men ripped up their shirts to make tourniquets for him and another wounded Marine.
Gregg was vocal about the damage caused by Agent Orange and the government's lack of response.
He spoke of the name-calling and how the Vietnam Veteran's were treated after they came home.
It was Gregg's story that made me think of Jim.
I'm sure Jim would have agreed with Gregg's views a hundred percent.
I can't remember who said it, but one of the speakers said a veteran told him, "I died in Vietnam; I just didn't know it." I believe that is true for a lot of the Veterans.
I know the war was a big transition for Jim, and he was a different person when he came back.
Jim's picture was included in a tribute video along with more than sixty Vietnam Veterans who have died since the war.
Latisha Koetting made an observation that it seems like the Vietnam Veterans are dying at a younger age that previous veterans.
This agrees with my own thinking.
I'm afraid we aren't going to see many old Vietnam Veterans.
I can't help but wonder what part Agent Orange had to do with Jim's physical problems, and I know that PSTD had everything to do with his depression and emotional problems.
It only leaves the question as to whether the war had anything to do with the rare form of early-onset dementia that Jim had.
These thoughts and the tribute must have been the reason I had a dream about Jim last night.
I dreamed Jim wore a brown sweater that was much too big for him.
He pulled the sweater across his chest one side over the other.
"I don't feel like me in here," he said, with his hands over his heart.
I straightened the sweater and buttoned it for him.
I put my arms around him and held him close to me.
"Now do you feel like yourself?" I asked.
He smiled and said, "Yes, I do." When I awakened from the dream, I felt like I had been holding Jim while he slipped into the world of dementia.
The feeling of loss was as strong as ever, but the unbearable thought was his loss of self.
The tribute was sad, but it was also long overdue.
Jim would have appreciated the tribute, but he would have left before "Taps." The sad tune always made him think of funeral duty during the year after he returned from his tour of duty in Vietnam.
The war changed everything for Jim and for our family.
I think he died there, but just didn't know it.
Copyright (c) Oct 2011 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 27, 2011>
Alzheimer's puts stresses on caregivers, but these strategies can help | alzheimer, parent, puts - Sedalia Democrat
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 20, 2011>
During my lifetime, I've gone on many road trips for various reasons.
Of course, my favorite trips were those taken during those golden weeks of the year known as vacation.
On those trips, life looked great through the windshield.
.I can't remember many trips that I didn't travel with someone else.
Traveling with others makes life's little adventures more fun.
It also increases the need for flexibility and bargaining.
"I'll go to the amusement park with you today, if we stop at a museum tomorrow." When we are on a fun trip, we wake up each morning filled with anticipation.
On a long trip, each day brings us closer to our destination--the ocean, the mountains, an exciting city, or maybe the breathtaking beauty of a national park.
If we are lucky, the sky is blue, the sun shines, birds sing and every event, place, and day exceeds our expectations.
Other journey don't measure up to our expectations, and we feel disappointed.
Sometimes it's just something way beyond our control--the weather, illness, car trouble, an emergency at home, or various combinations of disasters.
We may even regret wasting our time and vow we will not return to that particular destination.
Some journeys we plan, others just happen.
Some we move ahead with confidence and other times, we look back and wonder why we are even on this trip.
Throughout the Alzheimer's journey, we often find ourselves taking our eyes off the road ahead and looking at life through the rearview mirror.
This holds true for both the caregiver and the person with the disease.
The person with the disease becomes more dependent on the familiarity of the road already traveled.
As the ability to process new information becomes more difficult, the more important the rearview mirror becomes.
The caregiver may worry about the dangers of the journey ahead and believe that if they look into the rearview mirror they will feel safer.
They have managed to navigate the road so far, and the road ahead may have hairpin curves, tedious detours, drop-offs without guardrails, and maybe even a bridge out.
When I travel, I know that the rearview mirror has it place.
I like to check the rearview mirror to see how the traffic behind me is flowing.
Is that car going to pass me on a curve?
Okay, I need to change lanes and although I don't see anyone now, I know a car was behind me a few minutes ago and they haven't exited or passed--yeah, there they are in my blind spot.
Oops, is that highway patrol officer flashing his lights at me?
When you pass another vehicle, it is more certain you have cleared the vehicle when you see it in your rearview mirror rather than in side mirrors that plainly say, "Objects are closer than they appear." So what can it hurt to look at where you've been more than where you are going?
You never want to become so distracted looking at what is behind you that you miss important signs of what may lay ahead.
Not everyone wants to be a trailblazer, and you don't have to be when you are traveling the Alzheimer's Journey.
Others have been down the road you are traveling and they are willing to share their knowledge and help you chart your journey.
Any journey is easier with a map and an itinerary.
If you know which route you are going to take and what you will be doing along the way, the trip runs smoother and is much less stressful.
Copyright (c) October 2011 by L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 6, 2011>
On a drive last weekend, I had my first glimpse of autumn colors.
No other time of year is as beautiful as autumn with its hues of blazing orange, yellow, red, purple, and rust.
Between the colors and the brisk morning air, I was inspired to begin my autumn decorating.
Not satisfied with pulling out my Halloween decorations, I was compelled to go ahead and decorate for that seemingly forgotten holiday--Thanksgiving.
The two holidays blend well together with their autumn tones.
I learned a long time ago that when you turn jack o'lanterns to the wall, they look just like Thanksgiving pumpkins.
I guess my pilgrims can be Halloween costumes, but I don't think many kids dress as pilgrims.
It just seems to me that the two holidays are related--not as closely as brother and sister--more like first cousins.
With the holidays ahead and the temptation to go overboard on decorations, it may be time to consider whether decorations are in the best interests of a person with Alzheimer's.
If your loved one is in the early stages of the disease, she may be more enthusiastic about holiday decorating than she ever was.
He may enjoy handing out candy to trick-or-treaters.
As the disease progresses, decorations and all the hubbub of the holidays may become more of an ordeal than a pleasure.
One of the best ways to make life more pleasant for a person with dementia is to avoid change.
Holiday decorations can change the look of a familiar place--home.
When Jim was in the later stages of the disease he became agitated and distressed when I started putting away pictures and other decorations that normally sat on end tables and on the bookshelf.
One year, he followed along behind me removing the pictures from the storage box and putting them back on the shelf.
It taught me a lesson.
Just because it was what I wanted to do did not mean that it was the best decision for that particular time.
When he was living at home, it was better to simplify the holidays and  rethink traditions that no longer worked with our situation.
And, guess what?
I never felt the least bit guilty about it and it never ruined the holidays.
Throughout life, traditions have to be adjusted to each particular era.
If a tradition makes someone unhappy, it is time to create new ones.
There's something about autumn harvest that says it is time to benefit from the hard work that came before.
It is time to store up for the frigid weather ahead when winter brings the beauty of the snow and glistening ice tinged with the dangers of wind chills and treacherous roads.
Aw, time marches on, and we always have the unique beauty, and excitement, of the seasons ahead.
Copyright (c) October 2011 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 27, 2011>
On Alzheimer's Action Day, "Alzheimer's Journey" was launched as a new section to my www.lsfisher.com website.
Journey is written for caregivers, those with dementia, or for others who want basic information about Alzheimer's.
Knowledge is key to coping with Alzheimer's.
When my husband, Jim, was diagnosed with dementia, we were at the bottom of the Alzheimer's learning curve.
Neither of us had a close relative with Alzheimer's and really knew nothing about the disease.
I thought Alzheimer's was forgetfulness that developed in old age, and couldn't really understand why my forty-nine-year-old husband was being told he had this condition.
Still, the rudest awakening for us was to learn that although medications were available, they did not slow the progression of the disease.
Yes, medication could help with symptoms, but the inevitable decline could not be avoided.
I began to learn everything I could about Alzheimer's by exploring every resource I could find.
I read every book I could find on Alzheimer's, watched documentaries, visited countless websites, attended caregiver training (for professionals and family caregivers), forums, conferences, support groups, workshops, educational symposiums, and various other learning environments.
Every scrap of information helped me cope with a disease that wreaked havoc on life as I knew it.
Once Jim and I began the Alzheimer's Journey nothing was the same.
An Alzheimer's diagnosis is like any other crushing blow in life.
Once I worked through the stages of grieving for what should-have could-have been, I decided that I just didn't have the personality to give up and say, "Okay, Grim Reaper, you win." My time was much better spent with living than with dying.
After all, we are captive to the human body we inhabit and perfect health is the exception, not the rule.
My plan of action: (1) Learn as much as I could about Alzheimers, (2) Test for any treatable conditions that might cause dementia symptoms, (3) Treat any other health problems to maintain quality of life, (4) Accept the personal responsibility to ensure that Jim received the best care whether he was at home or in long-term care, and (5) Love him for the person he was at that particular time without mourning the loss of the man he had been or worrying too much about the man he would become.
It helps to take one day at a time, or as one caregiver said, "Sometimes I have to take one minute at a time." Talking to other caregivers kept me from feeling all alone.
I learned from their mistakes, and they learned from mine.
By supporting each other, we became stronger spiritually, and made much better caregivers.
Sometimes, it's hard to attend a support group meeting, and the group may not have a meeting scheduled when a crisis occurs.
Between group meetings, I found it easier to go online and post my questions, frustrations, and fears to a forum.
Alzheimer's Journey will have a forum where people who have been touched by Alzheimer's can communicate with each other.
It will be a virtual support group.
You will be able to view the forum without joining.
If you want to join in the conversation or want input on a problem, create a user name and register.
Alzheimer's Journey will be an Alzheimer's resource with articles, news updates, and a forum.
Everything will be in an easy to find format and you won't have annoying advertisements blocking your view of the screen.
I also won't take you in endless loops trying to build "clicks" to increase advertising revenue.
This site is for you, not for profit.
Copyright (c) September 2011 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.comwww.lsfisher.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 19, 2011>
September 21 was known as World Alzheimer's Day for many years.
This year, September was designated World Alzheimer's Month and the 21st took on a new role--Alzheimer's Action Day.
Alzheimer's disease is a world problem with 35.6 million affected.
It is a national crisis affecting 5.4 million in the U.S.
It is an issue in every state--Missouri has 110,000 residents living with Alzheimer's.
Once Alzheimer's deals us a devastating blow on a personal level, we learn the harsh reality behind the statistics.
When Alzheimer's claims a close friend, a cherished spouse, a beloved parent or grandparent, or sibling, we find ourselves in a battle with a formidable enemy.
In this country, more than 15 million caregivers provide comfort for loved ones who have Alzheimer's disease.
Few family caregivers have professional training.
Most learn by doing the job with a loving heart, compassion, and forbearance.
A primary caregiver doesn't sacrifice a few hours here and there.
Caregiving is a day in, day out job.
The duties go on, and on, and on.
Just when the caregiver thinks he or she has a handle on the situation, something will change.
Or the solution for a problem yesterday, might work again today, and tomorrow it may make things worse instead of better.
No one ever said life was easy, but most of you don't expect life to be a constant uphill battle without any rest.
Life shouldn't be a tug of war where you are in danger of being dragged into the mud pit no matter how deep you dig in our heels or how hard you try.
Caregiving can seem to be a thankless job.
Sometimes the people you expect to support you, instead let you down.
They may wish you good luck--but want to be left out of it.
Probably, one of the most difficult aspects of being a caregiver is to realize that not everyone is cut out to be one.
Caregiving is only for the strong at heart, and it sure isn't for sissies.
You can't shame or "guilt" someone into being a caregiver.
Anyone who provides care grudgingly will do a lousy job of it.
It is best to let those who can't go the caregiver route help in other ways.
So maybe your brother can't help mom with her bath, but what if he will mow the grass instead?
Maybe your sister can't tolerate your dad's repetitive questions, but if she loves to cook, maybe she can provide dinner a few nights a week.
Let people help at the levels they can.
Accept any offers of help that come your way!
Never, ever turn anyone down and have a list ready for those who really want to help, but don't know what you need.
It won't take long to separate the sincere offers from vague platitudes.
Why do caregivers hang in there day after day?
Is it out of a sense of duty?
Sometimes.
Is it because caregivers love being martyrs?
Not often.
The most common reason is love for the person with dementia--and to keep him or her as productive, happy, and physically healthy for as long as possible.
Whether you are a caregiver, or play a supporting role, have you thought about what you will do Wednesday to raise awareness?
At the Alzheimer's Action Summit last spring, we brainstormed some ideas to create awareness, so I've had some time to think about it.
At the beginning of September, I changed my Facebook photo to the "End Alz" icon.
I will be on a local radio station (KSIS) at 9:30 Wednesday morning to talk about the human and economic cost of Alzheimer's.
In the afternoon I'll be at Sedalia Book and Toy for a signing of my four Alzheimer's Books.
In honor of "Go Purple Day," I'll be giving a discount for anyone wearing purple.
All my royalties will be donated to the Alzheimer's Association Mid-Missouri Chapter.
On September 21, I hope you wear purple to show you are in the battle against Alzheimer's.
The bigger the army, the better our chances are of someday living in a world without Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) September 2011http://earlyonset.blogspot.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 12, 2011>
 "Hey, Sheila, just touching base," my call had gone to voice mail, as I pulled out onto the highway early Saturday morning on my way to the Walk to End Alzheimer's.
"It's a beautiful day and I don't think it is going to r-a-i-n." I spelled the word rather than say it aloud.
All week the forecast had been for a beautiful day, and two days ago, it changed to a 40 percent chance of rain.
At the fairgrounds, Bobby and Kim had arrived with tables and chairs.
Since this was my thirteenth walk and their first, I showed them where we needed tables.
A year's worth of planning has gone into making this day special for the people who know the pain this disease leaves in its wake.
Banners flew high, balloons were delivered, and my books lay on the table ready to sign.
As I signed books, I heard their stories.
"I used to walk for Jimmy," my husband's cousin Shirley told me.
"Now, I walk for my mom too.
She doesn't know me anymore." I heard sorrow in her voice and saw pain in her eyes.
"I just lost my husband," an elderly lady said as I signed her book.
"He had Alzheimer's." Her family was one of our new teams.
"I'm so sorry," I said.
Our eyes met and we connected--person to person, woman to woman, widow to widow.
We shared through silent communication the knowledge of watching a loved one change, and oh, so slowly, fade away.
"You are Lynne's sister," I said as I looked up and saw a woman holding a small dog in her arms.
Lynne, my friend, had early-onset Alzheimer's.
"I wrote about her on my blog, but it will be in next year's book." The stories lay on my heart.
I heard about grandparents, sisters, brothers, uncles, spouses, friends, co-workers... Voices shared special memories and snippets of lives lost to a disease whose only survivors are family members like those standing in front of me.
Oddly, enough, the day was festive.
The sorrow pushed aside as we do what we can--support the Alzheimer's Association and wear our purple to create awareness that Alzheimer's is a formidable enemy and we are going into battle.
The music was upbeat and the teams lined up to begin the walk.
Sheila and I carried the banner through the arbor and as we headed out onto the fairgrounds, her son Phillip took over for her, and Phillip and I led everyone onto the route.
We passed signs with Alzheimer's information: Every 69 seconds a person develops Alzheimer's.
How many minutes does this walk take?
As we looped past the midway area of the fairgrounds, Phillip said, "People are just now coming out." He was right.
This had to be a record-breaking crowd.
A few people passed us up.
My nieces Taylor and Alex decided they wanted to run and moved ahead of us.
Everyone was greeted with applause and "Chariots of Fire" music at the finish line.
While we were gone, numbers were tallied.
Sheila announced that we had more than 350 walkers and raised more than $23,000, surpassing all our goals.
We gathered in a grassy area to release the balloons.
Sheila brought began a countdown.
Purple balloons sailed toward heaven with names, messages, and prayers written on them.
Through my own tear-blurred eyes, I noticed a young couple holding each other tight as they both cried.
Through the pain, I heard whispers of hope.
We want this cruel disease to end.
This vicious cycle of disease, loss, and certain death needs to be stopped.
We are families and friends of 5.4 million Davids fighting a formidable giant.
The walk ended, goodbye hugs shared, the cleanup finished, and we went our separate ways.
On the drive home, I felt like pinching myself.
Was the day really over and as successful as I thought, or was I just dreaming again?
My elation with the success of the day, so perfect, was replaced with other more sobering thoughts.
I couldn't call my friend Ted to tell him the great news.
His numbers are still programmed into my cell phone, but he is gone.
The stress of caring for a loved one with Alzheimer's can be deadly for the primary caregiver.
For a crushing moment, I'm overwhelmed with a vivid image of Jim and painful loss.
Then my phone rang and brought me back to the present.
Life goes on, and I have much, much more work to do.
This battle isn't over yet!
As I unloaded my car, I heard the distant rumble of thunder.
Droplets felt cool on my skin and refreshing to my spirit.
It was a perfect time for r-a-i-n to begin a new cycle of life.
Copyright (c) September 2011http://earlyonset.blogspot.com Photo courtesy of Randy Kirby, Sedalia MO
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, September 7, 2011>
Organizers prepare for Saturday's 'Walk to End Alzheimer's' | fisher, linda, organizers - Sedalia Democrat
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 3, 2011>
Aren't we all getting tired of the years that have passed without finding the elusive cure for Alzheimer's?
It is time to take up the banner and proclaim we want to end Alzheimer's NOW.
Alzheimer's has no cure or prevention and according to the CDC nearly 75,000 die each year from the disease.
More than five million people in the U.S. have Alzheimer's, and worldwide 35 million have the disease.
Alzheimer's Disease International estimates that 115 million people worldwide will have Alzheimer's by 2050.
At one time, I knew nothing about Alzheimer's and certainly didn't think it affected anyone but the elderly.
When the doctor told my 49-year-old husband he had dementia, most likely Alzheimer's, my first reaction was, "They have medication for that now, don't they?" After our ten-year journey, I learned many harsh truths about Alzheimer's.
I know that I don't want to have the disease, not now, not ever.
I want to always recognize the people I love and continue to enjoy the talents and skills I've accumulated during my lifetime.
I don't want anyone in my family to develop Alzheimer's.
I love visiting with my mom and discussing practical and philosophical matters with her--trivial details, or sweeping generalities.
If she were to develop dementia, I would miss that important relationship.
Not only do I wish that no one close to me has Alzheimer's, I wouldn't wish it on my worst enemy.
September is World Alzheimer's Month and a perfect time to continue your support of the Alzheimer's mission if, like me, you are a longtime volunteer.
It is also an opportune time for newbies to learn about Alzheimer's and become advocates.
Those of us who know Alzheimer's from personal experience can show our support of this special month by wearing purple.
After looking up information about purple, I believe it is a great choice for the fight against Alzheimer's.
The color purple symbolizes mystery, and Alzheimer's is indeed a mysterious disease.
Researchers have learned much about the disease, but cannot solve the mystery of how to cure or prevent the disease.
Purple represents magic, and we are ready for that magical moment when we live in a world without Alzheimer's.
Purple is a combination of red (the warmest color) and blue (the coolest color).
The color spectrum extremes could be compared to the emotional turmoil Alzheimer's takes on the family of a person with Alzheimer's.
It is only the second day of the month and I've polished my nails with an X-treme shade of purple.
That way I'm sure that I'm wearing purple every day of World Alzheimer's Month.
For many years, the 21st day of September was known as World Alzheimer's Day, but since we now have an entire month, this day is known as Alzheimer's Action Day.
I have already changed my Facebook icon to END ALZ and encouraging everyone to do the same if they are ready to take the power of purple to the X-treme.
Why don't we really make September 21 an action day?
When you put on purple that day, take a few minutes to call your senator and representative to let them know Alzheimer's research is a priority for you.
Alzheimer's research has always been underfunded and in this time of budgetary crisis, the belt may be tightened to the point of drying up Alzheimer's research funding.
It will take millions of advocates to convince our legislators that Alzheimer's isn't going to go away on its own.
The cost of Alzheimer's disease is staggering.
It is an expensive disease and a devastating disease for individuals with Alzheimer's and for their families.
September 21 is Go Purple day!
Wear your purple and share your personal story.
The End of Alzheimer's Starts With Me--And You.
Individually, and collectively, we can take the POWER of PURPLE to a whole new level.
Copyright September 2011, L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 28, 2011>
The sports world was shocked by news that 59-year old Coach Pat Summitt, Tennessee Women's basketball coach, has an Alzheimer's type of dementia.
The news wasn't uncovered through investigative reporting--the coach made the announcement herself.
Coach Summitt has met her Alzheimer's challenge head on and fighting back.
She knows this disease is not a game and nothing short of a miracle will allow her to win.
Still, she has faced the disease with courage and announced that she will continue to coach as long as she can.
With a staff of veteran coaches and a supportive administration, Coach Summitt may be in the game for a long time.
Remaining active and involved is the coach's way of focusing on what she can do rather than what she can't.
While the coach made national news, on a more personal level I heard from a friend of mine has always shown remarkable courage and faith.
She developed frontotemporal dementia (FTD) while she was in her 30s.
After our initial polite greetings, I asked her how things were going.
"Taking it one day at a time," she wrote on Facebook.
She went on to tell me that she and her husband had separated.
This was sad and surprising news because he had always been so supportive and loving toward her.
She goes on to tell me that her teenage son feels responsible for making sure she is all right.
Times are tough for them, and she had tried to find a part-time job to give her something to do and to supplement their income.
She had already been fired from two jobs.
She couldn't remember all the steps to putting hamburgers together at the fast food place.
She worked as a night clerk at a hotel but couldn't keep anything straight so she was fired from that job too.
She has an interview for a third job on Monday.
My friend had her life turned upside down when she was diagnosed with FTD and now with her husband leaving, her world has flipped again.
Unfortunately, rather than making the world right side up for her, it is even more out of kilter.
I think about how her husband must have felt to walk away from her.
It would be easy to say what he did was unforgivable and let it go at that.
But diseases like Alzheimer's or FTD do not just affect the person with the disease.
Relationships are collateral damage.
I do not condone what he did, but I do understand how year after year of caregiving takes its toll.
I've seen caregivers who sacrificed any semblance of a normal life for a decade or more, and some who sacrificed life itself and died before the person with dementia.
Even the best of us are only human.
Loving caregivers do what they can for as long as they can.
It takes determination and courage to hang in there day after day until the job is done.
No one except a primary caregiver knows how hard that is, and I suspect that those caregivers would be the most adamant that my friend's husband deserves to be eternally punished for his neglect.
After all, he abandoned his wife in her time of need, and abdicated his responsibility to a teenager.
As for my friend, she faces the future with optimism and courage.
For now, she will be satisfied with a part-time job.
She has her faith and a son who loves her.
I don't understand why life has dealt Pat Summitt and my friend these terrible blows, but I know they are women of courage, an inspiration, and an example for all of us.
Copyright (c) August 2011 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 19, 2011>
Every now and then, I just have to go see a movie.
A few weeks ago I saw The Smurfs with my grandchildren and daughter-in-law.
I can relate to that show because I used to watch The Smurfs on TV with my kids when they were little.
Jim and I even used the "Not far now" description when we were traveling, although sometimes our destination was still far, far away.
I really wanted to see something that wasn't animated and thought Rise of the Planet of the Apes looked interesting.
My memories of the Planet of the Apes original movie were fuzzy, but I remembered the story was intriguing and that the apes were more human than humans.
It didn't take long to realize Alzheimer's played a key role in the Rise of the Planet of the Apes.
Will, a researcher, discovered a cure for Alzheimer's and the apes it was tested on became highly intelligent.
Like too many miracle drugs, the fictional ALZ112 had deadly side effects.
Apes became highly intelligent and human died from a virus.
The science fiction movie reflects how much our fears today have changed since the 60s when the original Planet of the Apes aired.
In the new story, human holocaust is caused by a pandemic rather than a nuclear war.
We are all afraid of getting a terrible disease without a cure.
Oh, wait.
Isn't that what Alzheimer's is today?
More than five million Americans are living with a disease that has no cure or effective treatment.
Although the apes were the focus of the movie, Will's dad was a key part too.
His dad was the compelling reason Will sought a cure for Alzheimer's.
I imagine some people who would never go to see an "Alzheimer's" movie might have seen their first glimpse of some of the challenges caregiver's face.
Will's loving exasperation with his dad is  part of daily life for caregivers as they do what they can to care for loved ones.
The one thing that happened in this movie that hasn't happened yet in real life was the interlude when the drug temporarily "cured" Alzheimer's.
What would it be like to wake up one morning and find your loved one had returned to normal?
That would indeed be a day for celebration!
Will we ever see that day?
Dedicated scientists have found miracle cures for other diseases.
I carry a scar on my arm from a smallpox immunization.
My children don't have the scar because by the time they were old enough, it was no longer necessary.
Smallpox was virtually unheard of during their childhood.
Polio was another disease I remember being warned about when I was young.
Both of these diseases were challenging, but cures were found.
That is what we need for Alzheimer's--and the sooner the better.
Too many people have journeyed down a road with a dead end.
The warning signs are there, but with no way to go except forward, the destination is the same for everyone.
I understand Will's desperation to stop the disease from taking his dad.
I've felt that desperation, and I've seen it in the eyes of other family members when they hear the diagnosis is Alzheimer's.
Finding a cure seems to be moving in slow motion while we fast forward to the scary parts, and all we really want is a happier ending than we've been given.
With all the medical advances of the past twenty years, or even the past five years, why can't Alzheimer's be cured?
It's like the key to unlock the mystery of Alzheimer's is buried in a mountain of keys that all look alike.
It seems an impossible task to find the correct key and insert it into the lock.
But when that perfect key is found, the lock will spring open.
The cure for Alzheimer's isn't just possible in a science fiction movie.
The right key is there, it's just waiting to be found.
Copyright (c) August 2011 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blospot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 13, 2011>
I worked at the Missouri State Fair this year taking pictures in the Cooperative building.
I've had this job before and always enjoyed handing over this personal souvenir of the fair.
The pictures are taken in front of a backdrop with the year, a life-sized Buddy Bear, and the words "Fun at the Fair." I snapped the pictures as soon as the babies stopped crying and the adults quit scowling.
Another cooperative employee pulled them up on a computer screen and sent them to the printer.
Part of the fun is seeing the priceless expression on a newbie's faces when he realizes the picture is free.
"You aren't going to get my phone number or email account number to pressure me to buy something else?" one man asked.
"No, we aren't even going to ask your name," I replied.
"We just take a picture and give it to you." Having their picture taken is on some people's "must do at the fair" list.
They walk through the door and immediately get in line to have their picture taken.
One man said, "We have fifteen of these on our refrigerator--one taken each year." Another man said, "This is our annual family picture." A woman said with surprise in her voice when she looked at the picture of her daughter, "She's taller than Buddy Bear now!" A lot of us have annual events that mark the passage of time.
It may be a family reunion, a holiday, or the State Fair.
It's amazing to compare snapshots year-to-year and see how we have changed.
It's always a little bittersweet when you look at your children, or grandchildren, and visually time travel the distance from one year to the next in a veritable blink of an eye.
Pictures used to be harder to take and people my age didn't grow up in front of digital cameras and cell phones that send pictures to the Internet in a few clicks.
We had to buy rolls of film with 12 or 24 pictures on them.
We snapped away and then sent the film off to be developed.
So we paid for film, paid for photo development, and then threw away about half of the pictures because they didn't "take." The good thing about the old-fashioned way is we ended up with print photos.
Now, I take hundreds of pictures and store them on my computer, and seldom have print copies of them.
Snapshots are a pictorial history of our lives.
They can help us retrieve memories that are filed within the deepest recesses of our brains.
Sometimes a picture can remind us of how the sun felt on our skin, or how the breeze smelled.
Snapshots are a way of time travel without using any mythical machine.
When Jim went into the nursing home, we surrounded him with photos of family.
He had several small photo albums to remind him of better times.
Occasionally, he would look at a photo and say the names of the people in the pictures.
I brought pictures of Jim on my advocacy trips to Washington DC.
The first picture in my small album was of Jim dressed in his western shirt, Levis, and cowboy hat before dementia changed him.
The second picture was of the early stages, what I called his eccentric stage, when he wore a denim jacket decorated with pins and his battered nametag from Branson.
In the middle stages, the picture was taken at the park and he wore a Kansas City Chief's shirt and sweatpants.
His eyes have a blank look.
Then in the later stages, the picture showed Jim in the nursing home hallway sitting in his merry walker.
Now, most of the snapshots are put away, and I only look at them occasionally with smiles and, sometimes, tears.
The pictures are a one-dimensional view of a full and rich lifetime of memories.
Special events roll around annually and in the meantime, we will snap away to fill our computers and photo albums with people we love and places we visit.
Life goes on and we continue to take pictures and record today for tomorrow's history.
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher August 2011 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 31, 2011>
I used to play a game with my grandson where I put my forehead against his and said, "Look into my eyes!" For some reason he always thought that was funny.
It might have been my goofy tone of voice, or else he could see something in my eyes no one else could.
Recently I found out just how deeply an optometrist can look into my eyes.
While I was on vacation, I saw some flashes of light in my left peripheral vision and a few quick Internet searches later discovered that it could mean a detached retina.
Knowing that doing something soon was the key, I tried to find someone to look at my eye on a weekend in a tiny town in Maine.
Well, that just didn't happen so I made an appointment as soon as I got home.
After dilating my eyes, the optometrist used a powerful scope to examine them.
His verdict was that my retinas were in fine shape, and I didn't have any eye disease.
That was the best kind of news for me to hear.
After all, my vision is horrible and I didn't need anything to make it worse.
Now it seems that eyes may be a way to detect Alzheimer's.
Anyone who has been through the diagnostic process, especially with younger-onset dementia, knows just how painstakingly slow, and expensive, getting a diagnosis can be.
It is no wonder that some people skip the testing and just assume they have Alzheimer's.
Researchers have found a couple of different biomarkers in eyes that would indicate Alzheimer's disease or the risk of getting Alzheimer's disease.
A new study from Australia discovered that blood vessels in the eyes of people with Alzheimer's were a different width than those who did not have the disease.
Several years ago, researchers at Boston University found amyloid (the substance in Alzheimer's plaques) in the eyes of people with Alzheimer's.
Some of the original researchers have been working several years on a laser scanner for early detection of Down's and Alzheimer's.
It takes years for research to be put into common use and the eye test for Alzheimer's is no exception.
So it doesn't look like easy detection will happen soon.
You may be wondering why researchers would be trying to detect Alzheimer's early when there isn't a cure available and all current medication does is delay the symptoms, not the disease.
One of the most compelling arguments for early diagnosis is to make sure you have Alzheimer's and not a treatable condition.
It took us nearly two years to get a diagnosis for Jim.
At first, we thought his symptoms might be from depression.
When treating the depression didn't help, he was checked for vitamin deficiencies, diabetes, AIDS, and other conditions that we probably didn't even know they were ruling out.
After psychological testing, we learned that Jim had dementia--and the most likely cause was Alzheimer's.
This brought about a new series of tests.
One scan indicated damage from a stroke, but a more sensitive scan showed general brain atrophy rather than stroke damage.
A few specialists later, the Alzheimer's type of dementia diagnosis seemed most likely.
So how would earlier detection have helped?
If Jim had been able to take the Alzheimer's drugs, they would have been more effective during the early stages of the disease.
More important to us, we didn't ignore a treatable condition with the assumption that he had Alzheimer's.
I had good insurance, or we could not have afforded to explore all the possible reasons for Jim's problems.
Not everyone is fortunate enough to have insurance to pay for the endless testing to rule out reversible conditions.
If an eye exam could be used as a screening tool, it would be an inexpensive way to monitor your health.
Looking into your eyes could mean you would know if your symptoms are from Alzheimer's, or whether you need to keep searching for a different, and possibly treatable, cause.
Copyright (c) July 2011 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, July 22, 2011>
Last Friday, I visited Four Season Living Center to deliver a packet to the Walk to End Alzheimer's team captain.
I parked my car in my usual spot.
My eyes automatically settled on a certain window; I swallowed hard and blinked back the tears.
Jim lived in that room for four years, and we spent a lot of time there.
Each day when I visited him, I didn't know what to expect, but it seemed like there weren't too many dull moments.
I didn't recognize the lady behind the reception desk, but while I was talking to her, Danna walked up behind me.
She greeted me with a smile and a hug.
"The lobby looks different than it did when the deer came crashing through and jumped into Jim's room," I said.
For the benefit of the new worker, I briefed her on the deer story.
"It's strange that you walked in here today," Danna said.
"I just got off the phone with Gwyn's family.
They wanted to know if we had a copy of the newspaper article about the deer.
Gwyn passed away last week.
Suddenly.
She was only 46." I was shocked, and it took a minute for it to soak in.
Gwyn, gone, when all I could think about was her sense of humor and how she was so full of life.
Danna called Gwyn's family back and I talked to them.
It seems that Gwyn had often told the story about the day the deer came to visit the nursing home.
I promised to send them the "deer" story from my journal.
Here is an excerpt from the story.
Oh, Deer!When I arrived at Four Seasons, I saw broken glass in the lobby and the admissions office."Linda, did you hear what happened?" Richard, the administrator asked me.
"Yes, they called me, but I can't visualize how it happened.""The deer broke through that window over there," he said pointing to a gaping hole in the south wall.
"Then he ran across the lobby and into Pat's office...""And I was talking on the phone," Pat said, "this deer came charging into my office.
I was just petrified.
I just hung the phone up.
I can't even remember who I was talking to.
The deer crashed out my window and ran across the lawn.
Then we saw him leap through a resident's window.""Then Lois ran down the hall and into Jim's room and jumped on the deer," Richard said."What?
You jumped on the deer?" I asked, looking at the director of nursing.
It was hard to believe that someone would do such a thing.
"Where was Fred when all this was going on?" Fred was the nursing home's adopted greyhound."He was right here, but he seemed to be as surprised as we were," Richard said.I walked rapidly down the hallway, hit the button to disarm the alarm and pushed the door open to the Alzheimer's unit.
Jim's room was a shambles, with fragments of glass still in his air conditioning unit.
Smears of blood on the floor, and deer hair stuck in the cracks and crevices made Jim's room look like a crime scene.
Gwyn and Mary started filling me in on the morning's events: When the six-point buck made his unexpected entry through the window, most of the residents were in the dining room eating breakfast, except Jim, who was wandering the halls.Mary was just getting ready to take Jim to his room to feed him when the deer careened into the room, glass and blood flying everywhere.
Lois arrived on the scene, pinning the thrashing deer to the floor with her best wrestling hold.
Gwyn grabbed a blanket and told Lois she should get off the deer.
Gwyn threw the blanket over the wounded animal, then decided to sit on the deer to make sure it didn't get up and run down the hall."I was sitting on the deer, hanging onto both antlers, and he started bleeding out of his mouth.
I said awwwwwwww, and let go and started petting him.
Someone said 'what are you doing!' and I grabbed hold of both antlers again."Conservation agents responded to the 911 call and cut the wounded deer's throat.
The agent asked Gwyn if she had a hunting permit."No, why?" Gwyn asked him.
She was alarmed, wondering why she needed a hunting permit when all she did was sit on the deer.
The agent started writing.
"Oh, no!" Gwyn was thinking, "I'm going to get a ticket!" Instead, the conservation agent wrote out a permit allowing Gwyn to keep the deer."I'm from Arizona," Gwyn told me, "where the deer stay in the woods where they belong!
I had never even seen a deer up close.
I don't know what I was thinking, other than I couldn't let that deer get to my residents!"  Like I said--never a dull moment.
I can still hear Gwyn's husky voice and her laughter.
Copyright (c) July 2011 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com   
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 11, 2011>
"Mom and I went to the Mennonite restaurant to eat, and there was a hearse parked right in front of it," I said to my brother, Donnie.
I had stopped by the nursing home to visit him while I was in town.
"I couldn't help but wonder if a coffin was in the back--in this sweltering heat!
Mom said, 'Even hearse drivers have to eat.'" I told Donnie about my covert glance into the hearse, and we shared a laugh about my concern.
Donnie's speech is slurred from strokes, and I have to listen closely to hear what he has to say.
The hearse story reminded him of a memory.
"Do you remember when Butch Gardner bought that old hearse?
He thought he was really going to get the girls to go out with him, but none of them would ride in the hearse." I laughed at the memory of the hearse.
"That wasn't Butch that owned that hearse," I said, delving into my own memory.
"It was a guy named Bruce--he was Claude and Leroy's cousin.
He was a good-looking guy, and I did go out with him in the hearse.
Mom and dad disagreed on whether I could go or not, but they finally let me.
The date turned out to be the two of us and a whole carload of kids in the back." "Yeah, I remember riding in the back," Donnie said.
"I thought it was Butch." "Remember, we went to a creek and went swimming.
That was my 'date' in the hearse." "I think that was our club that went to the creek in the hearse," Donnie said.
"I believe it was too," I said.
A big group of us country kids formed a club and went on different activities together.
Butch was in that club, so that's probably why Donnie thought the hearse belonged to him.
"Do you remember the skating party?" I asked.
"That was the second time I ever saw Jim.
I told Jim our club was going to be at the skating rink and he met us there.
He wore a shirt with the sleeves ripped off."  Donnie nodded and I knew that he too was remembering Jim.
After Jim and I greeted each other, he went to get his skates.
I sat on a bench next to Claude to lace up my skates.
"Is that guy bothering you?" Claude asked.
I'm sure he thought Jim was some kind of local punk.
"If he is, just say the word and I'll straighten him out!" I reassured Claude that I knew Jim and had invited him to the skating party.
I was touched since Claude was a mild mannered kid and Jim was a former Golden Gloves boxer.
Donnie and I laughed over our shared memories.
In a serious moment, Donnie said, "I think I know more people that have died that I know who are alive." "I know what you mean," I said.
The memories I had just shared about Claude and Jim, once a shared memory between the three of us, is now mine alone.
Both of them are gone.
I kissed Donnie on the cheek, feeling good about our visit.
Some days he is depressed or upset, but today we had found a happy place in our shared memories.
Our visit made me remember how vivid Jim's memories were before dementia erased them.
Before dementia, little slices of life lived in Jim's memories long after I had forgotten them.
I thought about how sad it was when our memories were gone, and how lonely I felt when Jim couldn't remember our special times together.
Our memories are flawed because we each see life from an individualized perspective.
Certain moments in life are etched into our brains with clarity, while others are fuzzy and out of focus.
The older we get, the more memories become so buried that we may never retrieve them again.
Memories may be distorted by time or disease, but if we voice our recollections, those reminiscences are a way to reconnect to a shared past.
After stories are erased from our brains, they can linger forever in our hearts.
Copyright (c) July 2011 L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 5, 2011>
Around Independence Day, we often examine our reasons for being proud of our country and count our blessings for living in America.
To celebrate this holiday, we eat ourselves silly at picnics and backyard barbeques, take advantage of sidewalk sales, listen to patriotic music, have fun in the sun, drag out all things red, white, and blue, and set off thousands of dollars worth of fireworks.
We fairly explode with pride in our country.
I went to the lake to see the magnificent fireworks shooting into the sky over the dam.
The display was rivaled by nature's thunder and lightning.
I overheard a woman talking about her plans to watch a pyrotechnical display in a nearby town the next night.
She said the best vantage point was the nursing home parking lot.
I thought of how Jim hated the sounds of fireworks because they sounded like war to him.
I tried to keep him away from the sights and sounds of the holiday.
Do you know what an impossible task that is?
I wonder if other people with dementia might not understand why the night is full of loud booms and bright lights.
No doubt, we live in an amazing country with opportunity for all.
This doesn't mean everyone appreciates the wide-wonderful country we call home.
We find a lot to complain about on a regular basis--the price of a gallon of gas, the government (especially when our political party is not in power), the weather, taxes, and all those immigrants--illegal or not.
This country was built on immigration.
Other than Native Americans, we are in this wonderful country because our ancestors pulled up roots and transplanted themselves in America.
I cannot imagine how a person could leave his homeland and start over in a new land, or in a new world, as it was known.
They came here knowing they would never go home again.
To me, this is as attractive as it would be to move to a different planet.
Our newspaper ran a contest for local people to write about why they were proud to be an American in fifty words or less.
Since Saturday morning was a more laidback day than normal, I read the short, short essays written by proud Americans.
One really caught my eye.
Vietnam veteran, Larry D. Stevenson, wrote: "Drafted into the Army, served a tour in Vietnam where I was involved in heavy combat.
Received this nation's second highest combat award, the Silver Star.
Came home to a country in turmoil over the conflict.
What makes me proud of that?
The rights we, as Americans, have to voice our opinions for or against our government's actions."  When we can be proudest of the freedoms that hurt us most, we have achieved a higher level.
I've often noticed that the men and women who have sacrificed the most for this country understand this more than others.
We aren't proud of our country because everything is perfect.
Part of the amazing part about our country is the way we embrace the imperfect, contrary to our own personal preferences, and our tolerance for the melting pot of nationalities and personalities that make up the citizens of this country.
We can bellyache about what is wrong in this country fully confident that although others might not like it, they can't stop us.
Before we label a practice or person as "un-American" it is time to give serious thought to want makes America special.
Could it be that the very things we think are un-American are, indeed, the embodiment of why this is a great country?
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher July 2011 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 27, 2011>
During a People magazine interview, Glen Campbell and his wife, Kim, revealed that he has Alzheimer's.
Seventy-five year old Campbell plans a Goodbye Tour when his new album is released this summer.
It takes courage and grit, true grit, to make this announcement to his fans before the tour.
How forgiving will fans be?
Some fans are going to notice the mistakes, as will the critics.
David Lindquist's titled his June 5 review of Campbell's performance at the Palladium concert hall, Carmel, IN, "Glen Campbell gives mystifyingly bad show." In his review Lindquist said, "Facing a sold-out audience nestled in a world-class room, Campbell came across as unprepared at best and disoriented at worst."  Perhaps this concert was the wake-up call for Glen and Kim Campbell to set the record straight.
Kim said, "Glen is still an awesome guitar player and singer, but if he flubs a lyric or gets confused on stage, I wouldn't want people to think, 'What's the matter with him?
Is he drunk?'" I'm sure Alzheimer's caregivers know what Kim is feeling.
Each person has talents that are lost in the labyrinth of Alzheimer's.
Dementia is relentless and unforgiving as it takes away a lifetime of talent and achievement.
Glen Campbell has played the guitar since he was four years old.
His talent was his ticket out of poverty to stardom.
He has accomplished heights that most musicians just dream about--Gold, Platinum, double-Platinum albums, CMA Male Vocalist of the Year and Entertainer of the Year, four Grammys, and induction into the Country Music Hall of Fame.
Campbell's music crossed over to top both country and pop charts.
"Rhinestone Cowboy and "Southern Nights" were both No.
1 hits.
Campbell co-starred in True Grit with John Wayne and Kim Darby, and he sang the title song.
Lindquist goes on to describe Campbell's performance, "He mangled lyrics (despite unabashed use of video prompts on three onstage monitors), clanged countless off-key guitar notes and generated zero rapport with the crowd."  I can imagine how Kim's heart must have sunk.
I remember sitting at a family reunion watching Jim struggle to play music with his relatives and some family friends while he was still in the early stages.
I remember a mediocre guitar player (one of the invited "friends") telling Jim he was in the wrong key.
This man who had no talent kept criticizing Jim's playing.
Jim just seemed to be in his own little world, but it made me angry.
Jim wasn't playing a concert hall where people had paid dearly for tickets--he was playing at a small park for people that loved him and were forgiving of the occasional mistake.
Sometimes Jim forgot lyrics to songs he had sung hundreds of times, or he might play the wrong song in response to a request.
Other times, he would play "Buckaroo" from beginning to end without an error.
It was always worth the false starts to hear our favorites.
"Campbell struggled to even communicate with long-running band leader T. J. Keunster," Linquist wrote.
"'What key?
.
.
.
Who wrote it?
.
.
.
I like this song," served as an evening-long mantra .
.
.'"  These are classic communication mistakes of people with Alzheimer's.
These phrases are familiar to Glen from his years of playing music.
When words failed him, he fell back on them.
Will Glen Campbell go through with the Goodbye Tour?
If he does, will it be successful?
Now that people know why he did not perform to his usual standards, will they be forgiving?
Jayling, a fan who attended the concert, posted a response on the Lindquist review: "It was a flawed show, yes.
But overall I enjoyed the show." To perform this Goodbye Tour, both Glen and Kim Campbell will need to show more True Grit than Rooster Cogburn had in the movie.
Glenn's witty repartee may be gone and he may stumble on the words to some of his own top 10 hits, but for those who love him these flashes of brilliance that made Glen Campbell a legend in his lifetime will be worth the wait.
Those fans will listen with love and applaud Campbell for what he can do, and forgive what he can't.
Copyright L. S. Fisher, June 2011 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, June 23, 2011>
Have you ever had someone on your mind and think, I'll call tomorrow, or next week?
Then, you don't get around to making that call--you just put it off one more day, and then another.
A few weeks ago, my caller ID was so full that I decided to delete some of the calls.
As I was clicking delete, I saw a call from my friend Ted from more than a year ago.
That reminded me that I should give him a call and see how things were going--see how his beloved wife Norma was doing.
Ted was a devoted caregiver for Norma, who had been in a nursing home for many years.
"You ever see that movie The Notebook?" Ted asked me a few years back.
He had invited me to Cracker Barrel, and he was digging in to chicken and dumplings.
"Yes, I saw it," I said.
"It was a beautiful story, but it made me cry." Most stories about Alzheimer's do make me cry, even if they are fiction.
"Me too," he admitted.
"What did you think of the ending?"  "It was a sad ending, but it brought the story full circle." I wasn't sure where Ted was going with this.
I thought the ending was a bit of a stretch as far as believability.
The odds are against an old couple dying at the same time.
"That's how I want it to be for Norma and me.
I know it won't happen, but I wish we could just go at the same time." Ted took a drink and I could see the wistful look on his face.
"You have to go on living, Ted.
You can't just die to make the ending come out to suit yourself." "I know that," he said.
He smiled and his eyes glistened with mischief, and he launched into a funny story.
Ted and I met at a Memory Walk awards luncheon about twelve years ago.
I don't think the Alzheimer's Association really knew what to think about us.
We tormented each other about how much money we could raise and whether Ted in Jefferson City or me in Sedalia could have the most successful walk.
Outwardly, we were rivals, but it wasn't long before we discovered that our friendship was much more important than the competition.
That was saying something for two people as competitive as we were.
We ran into each other from time to time--I attended his chicken dinners and Ted drove to Sedalia to come to our Night to Remember dances.
We not only spent money at the other's auction, we would bring items to be auctioned off.
Occasionally, we would "meet in the middle" for breakfast.
It was at one of our breakfasts that Ted told me his story for Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love.
I took notes, typed the story, and dropped it into the mail to him.
He called me as soon as he received the story.
"Linda Fisher," he said, "I can't stop crying long enough to read this story." We talked often on the phone, but days turned into weeks, weeks into months, until a year passed.
I really felt a strong urge to talk to Ted.
I had his home number and cell number programmed into my phone.
But it seemed that I was always going to finish a report, answer an email, or edit just one more story first.
Another week passed without making the call.
Then, on Tuesday as I finished a few things at work before my trip to Maine, I picked up the phone in response to hearing my name paged.
It was Joetta from the Alzheimer's Association.
"Linda, I wanted to let you know that Ted Distler passed away." I was just stunned.
"He was a recluse for about the last year.
He never left his home and never let anyone in to see him." She went on to tell me about the changes in Ted, a friend who somehow sank into depression, and I never did anything to help.
I felt like I had let him down at the time he needed me the most.
Then, I was filled with regret that I had never made that phone call--hadn't reached out to my friend.
Now he was gone, and I could never make it right.
There would be no more moments to laugh and joke with Ted.
"Is Norma still living?" I asked Joetta.
"Yes, but she is fading fast and they don't expect her to last long." I thought about chicken and dumplings at Cracker Barrel, a football game, breakfast, auctions, dances, chicken dinners, sitting on a park bench while I interviewed him for a research paper, a hug and kiss on the cheek--my friend, Ted.
So many images and good memories of a dear friend.
Lastly, I thought of The Notebook and wondered if maybe Ted didn't get his happy ending after all.
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher, June 2011 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 13, 2011>
Those pesky thirteen-year cicadas are about to drive everyone crazy with their incessant mating call.
Is it any wonder that someone came up with the bright idea of sugar coating cicadas and mixing them up into ice cream?
Cicada ice cream, really?
Sparky's Homemade Ice Cream sent employees to scavenge in their backyards to find the perfect texture for a popular new flavor.
What's not to love about getting the final revenge for the critters making that irritating noise?
The national news picked up the story--because, let's face it--Columbia isn't the only place putting up with the bumper crop of cicadas.
Cicadas are setting up shop everywhere.
The national news reported that the health department ordered Sparky's to stop selling cicada ice cream.
That, according to the original reporter was an exaggeration.
Actually, the health department admitted that consumption of cicadas were not addressed in the health code, but they thought the "eww" factor was not to be ignored.
Of course, they put it in more official language than admitting it was totally gross and tossed around words like "could not recommend" instead.
That news was probably well received by whoever had the job of de-winging the cicadas before they were boiled and coated with brown sugar and milk chocolate.
Hmmm.
Rumor has it that they taste a lot like peanuts.
I'm supplying these details for the homemade ice cream experts.
So, even though Sparky's pulled their most popular flavor of the season, this is definitely ice cream weather.
Today in Columbia, I heard this strange music.
"What the heck is that?" I asked.
"It's an ice cream truck," my friend said.
"Think we can catch it?" My mouth watered as I thought of how good ice cream is on a June day.
I've always loved ice cream.
When Jim and I lived in Manhattan, Kansas, while he finished out his obligation to the U.S. Army, we stopped by the 50 flavors place on a nightly basis.
It was a hot summer in Kansas, and I was a hugely pregnant woman with a craving for blueberry ice cream.
We lived in a one-room apartment--two rooms, if you count the bathroom.
Of course, we had no air-conditioning.
We cooled the room with a box fan in the window.
It didn't exactly cool the room since the outside air was more than 100 degrees throughout the entire month of July.
One day, Jim and I had a spat and rather than argue with a cranky woman on the verge of heatstroke, so he jumped in the car and left me.
Now, wasn't I in a fix?
No telephone, barefoot (who could stand shoes?)
and pregnant, and my husband just drove away in our only car.
He wasn't gone long, and soon he came back with a peace offering--a banana split.
I never cared much for banana splits because the toppings made it sickening sweet.
But, Jim brought it to me, so I sat down at the table with my back to him and tackled the enormous banana split, while he rested on our only other piece of furniture, the twin bed.
I will not gag, I told myself, pumping myself up with a psychological pep talk.
I will eat every bite, even if I have to throw up afterward.
This is the tastiest ice cream ever--it's just the syrupy topping I don't like, and all that whipped cream, and nuts, and that plastic tasting cherry on top.
And even the good ice cream is melting faster than the Wicked Witch of the West.
I finally scraped up the last spoonful of the soupy ice cream, and Jim said, "I really thought you would offer me some of the banana split." Oh, now, that was just too much!
My back was still turned to him, but he saw my shoulders shaking and rushed to throw his arms around me.
"Oh, honey," he said, "I didn't mean to make you cry." Yes, the tears were running down my face, but it was from laughter.
"It almost made me sick to eat the whole thing, but I didn't want to hurt your feelings," I finally managed to say when my laughter calmed down to uncontrollable giggles.
Later this month, on June 25, I can eat ice cream for a great cause at our second annual "Let's Cream Alzheimer's" Ice Cream Social.
The Ice Cream Social and silent auction are team fundraisers for the September Walk to End Alzheimer's.
We will be serving vanilla and chocolate with yummy chocolate chip cookies.
We will not be serving cicada ice cream--Really!
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 6, 2011>
Last Friday, I ate at Arby's and when I went to fill my drink cup, I noticed the slogan on the side--"It's gonna be a glass half-full kind of day." Well, after all, it was Friday, and I had to agree with the slogan 100%.
If it had been a Monday, I might have thought a little harder about whether it was a glass half-full, or half-empty, kind of day.
I don't do Mondays well since it's hard for me to get back into the grind after a weekend.
Whether I've slept late each day of the weekend, or awakened early, it seems the week always begins out of kilter.
I'm changing routines and suffer brain lag from the transition from weekend standard time to daylight rise-and-shine workday time.
So, Mondays, in general, are a half-empty kind of day--at least until I'm caffeined up and ready to go.
Last Saturday was definitely a half-full kind of day.
My mom came to my house and we were able to spend the day together.
I've learned to appreciate a day with family.
It seems that during our growing up years, we don't fully appreciate family.
Parents tell you what to do and when to do it (how dare they?)
and siblings like to argue (they are always wrong!).
Cousins are easier to like than siblings when you are growing up because you don't have to live with them.
Love them or want to strangle them, spending time with family fills the glass.
Optimists look at a glass and see it as half full.
We all know that no matter how thirsty you are, a half glass is most assuredly better than none.
The optimist feels blessed to have a half glass of cold, fresh water.
A dry-mouthed pessimist might look at the same glass and go, "Oh, golly gee, that half glass just isn't enough water to moisten my parched tongue." He begins to feel sorry for himself.
"If I don't get enough water, then my tongue will be so dry I may never speak again .
.
." and so on until he breaks out in a sweat.
He may question whether the water is fresh or if the glass is clean.
He has high expectations and a mere half glass falls short.
After we marry and have children, we have some half-empty days when the budget is straining at the seams, the car breaks down, the dog dies, or heaven forbid, a loved one is diagnosed with Alzheimer's.
When Jim was diagnosed with dementia of the Alzheimer's type, we couldn't even see the glass, much less determine whether it was half empty or half full.
If we could have seen the glass, I believe it would have been empty--at first.
Alzheimer's is a slow process, and if you let the news ruin your life, you might as well throw the glass on the floor and stomp it.
But you know what that means?
A shattered glass will never hold liquid again.
If the glass is broken, even a half-empty glass is an improvement.
That is when you move from depression to pessimism, and with a little gratitude for winning small battles, it's not that difficult to see the glass as half-full.
A half-glass kind of attitude might be all that helps you through the tough times.
If you let your inner strength kick in, you move forward with determination that better days are ahead.
In life, attitude and the happiness factor may vary from day-to-day, so a goal for a happy life is to have more half-full kinds of days than half-empty ones.
Having a few down days shouldn't affect a glass half-full attitude about life.
Who knows, with an optimistic attitude adjustment, the glass may overflow with possibilities.
Copyright (c) June 2011 by Linda Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 28, 2011>
Missouri has really been slammed by storms--first Joplin and then my hometown, Sedalia.
When the tornado sirens sounded in Sedalia and the ominous words, "Tornado on the ground!" were broadcast on the radio, my mind immediately visualized Joplin.
The Joplin tornado hit Sunday and like most people, I watched the story unfold on TV.
In Joplin, an F-5 tornado splintered lives and left behind a scene from a horror movie.
I knew people in Joplin through Missouri Writers Guild and Business Women of Missouri, and I worried about their safety.
At the BWM Conference in late April, two of the women from Joplin told me they had seen the announcement of the presentation I was making at the June 24 Alzheimer's Caregiver Conference in Joplin.
My friends were safe, but more than 130 people lost their lives.
Among the dead were ten residents of Greenbriar nursing home.
One of the dead at the nursing home, 70-year-old Richard Elmore had Alzheimer's disease according to his stepdaughter.
The Greenbriar staff was praised for moving the residents to a hallway in the few minutes warning they had.
I've seen nursing home staff in action during tornado warnings.
One night while I was at the nursing home where Jim lived, the sirens sounded and staff in the dementia unit led people into the hallway and seated them.
I pushed Jim into the hallway in his recliner.
He seemed unconcerned about the chaos around him as other residents moved up and down the hall and tried to get back into their rooms.
Our town had been hit hard by tornados in the 1970s and those of us who remembered those storms were a little nervous.
The staff passed out ice cream and the residents settled down to enjoy their treat.
The storm passed over without any damage.
Jim had never been scared of storms and had a ringside seat to the 1977 tornado that hit Sedalia.
Jim worked at Memorial Park Cemetery and rather that go into the metal building, he parked his truck in the cemetery.
His reasoning was that if the tornado got close, he would be safer in the open grave he had prepared for an afternoon funeral.
He was too close to the tornado to see the funnel, but he could see the houses across the street exploding.
"Okay," I questioned him later, "just what did you consider bad enough to get into the grave if you didn't do it when the tornado was just across the street from you?"  "You know, after Vietnam, I just can't get too excited about storms," he said.
Sedalia looked like it had been bombed, but no lives were lost.
The tornado that hit Sedalia on Wednesday, May 25, destroyed 65 homes, wiped out businesses along 65 Highway, and severely businesses on the south side of town.
So much debris rained down on the city and surrounding farmland that lost-and-found centers have been set up to reunite people with belongings swept up in the tornado.
My first glimpse of the damage was on my computer screen at work where I viewed a video taken from the Channel 9 helicopter.
My co-workers and I tried to identify businesses and mobile home parks that were in shambles.
Semis were tossed onto their sides, highline poles snapped with transformers on the ground, trees broken and flung onto cars, the school bus barn collapsed, and homes were dissected exposing furniture and insulation.
Storm stories have been shared through interviews and social media.
Hundreds of photos and videos are available on Facebook and YouTube.
I don't recall ever seeing so many people I personally know on the news.
Considering the path of destruction, we were fortunate--no deaths and, thankfully, only minor injuries.
This morning I thought about a Waylon Jennings/Jessi Coulter song Jim used to sing-- "Storms Never Last Do They Baby?" The song is a love song about a stormy relationship compared to the storms that disrupt life.
Those storms can be tornados or other severe storms, or they can be the turbulence that creates a bumpy ride along life's journey.
The truth of the song is that storms do not last.
Storms swoop into our lives, and in a heartbeat, can forever change our familiar landscape.
Just when we think it will bring us to our knees in defeat, a rainbow promises that life continues after the storm has passed.
Copyright May 2011 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 22, 2011>
For the eleventh time, I made the trip to Washington DC to add my voice to other Alzheimer's advocates.
For the second time my granddaughter went with me.
We were at the airport Saturday morning for our 6:30 AM flight and arrived in DC mid-morning.
While we waited for our room to get ready, we rode the Old Town Trolley down to the mall and toured the Museum of Natural History.
Sunday, we visited the national zoo to admire the pandas, elephants, apes, and reptiles.
Considering the forecast, the weather turned out to be fantastic.
Sunday evening the Summit began with the roll call of the states and a representative from each state told about their accomplishments in the past year.
After the roll call, we learned a storm was coming in and the candlelight rally would be held at the hotel.
During the rally, several people spoke, but one that stood out the most for me was twenty-two-year-old Keri Roaten, caregiver for the grandmother that raised her.
Just like caregivers twice her age, or even four times her age, Keri's life has been put on hold.
While each caregiver sacrifices many other events in life, it seemed particularly poignant to me that Keri missed activities that most teenagers take for granted.
She missed her prom and her college dreams were put on hold.
We held our candles high in remembrance and tribute for Keri's grandmother and for loved ones living with the disease and for those whose journeys have ended.
The first time I lit a candle at the vigil, I had just placed Jim in a nursing home.
I was plagued with doubts, fears, and anxiety.
Five years later in 2005, I lit my candle only a few short weeks after our journey ended.
This year, my heart ached and my eyes burned at the raw emotion of those were at an emotional crossroads.
Monday was a full day that  began at 7 AM and ended at 10 PM.
We heard Newt Gingrich, a longtime supporter, share his concern about the economic future of this country when, without effective treatment or a cure, Alzheimer's will cost the American Government $20 trillion between now and 2050.
Gingrich is optimistic that the scientific community will have a breakthrough if we invest in Alzheimer's research.
During lunch, Melody Barnes, domestic policy advisor to the President, spoke of President Obama's serious attention to the fight against Alzheimer's.
She considers the National Alzheimer's Project Act a step to further research and awareness.
The Summit culminates with legislative visits.
We met with the health aides for our senators and our representative to discuss our legislative issues.
Senator Blunt dropped by for a photo op.
This year we had a two-fold mission: the Alzheimer's Breakthrough Act and the HOPE for Alzheimer's Act.
We used a new approach on the Alzheimer's Breakthrough Act.
Rather than asking for a dollar amount for research, we asked for research funding to be driven by what the scientific community deemed necessary to make significant progress.
The HOPE for Alzheimer's Act covers three areas: (1) Early and Accurate Diagnosis, (2) Care Planning that ensures caregivers know all available resources, and (3) Medical Record Documentation.
My granddaughter and I were tired by the time we headed to the airport for our trip home.
I hope that someday we can make the trip to Washington, DC, just to sightsee.
My wish is for the day Alzheimer's is one of those diseases that people "used to have" but has been wiped from the face of the earth.
Until then, I'll pack my bags once a year to become a VOICE for those with Alzheimer's and their caregivers.
Copyright (c) May 2021 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 7, 2011>
The black and white photo of my mom, Lula Capps, is worth a thousand words, but a million words remain unsaid.
The picture doesn't show the color of the rich auburn hair that she always called red.
It doesn't show it pulled back into the ponytail that I remember her wearing on a regular basis.
You can't see that she looked so youthful that she was often mistaken as a sister to her eight children.
The picture doesn't show her talent as songwriter, singer, and musician.
It merely hints of the intelligence of a woman who worked her way up from a sewing machine to management without a high-school diploma.
She always taught us to believe in ourselves and that we could do anything we set our minds to do.
She wanted her children to grow up to be independent adults with a good education and to have a better life.
She was not the typical mother of the 50s.
She didn't wear housedresses, cook and clean all day, or grow potted plants.
She worked at a factory, wore blue jeans, read novels, played her guitar, and drank lots of coffee.
On a Saturday night, you would usually find her at Grandma and Grandpa Whittle's house jamming with her brothers.
The picture does not show the wonderful, complex woman that gave life to the eight Capps kids.
It doesn't show the struggles and triumphs of a lifetime.
It doesn't show the love she has given and received from her family.
You see no hint of sadness for the future when she outlived every member of her birth family or the heartache of a woman who held a son in her arms only one time before he died.
The picture doesn't show her beautiful soul, only her lovely face and smile.
My mom was there for me when Jim developed dementia.
She drove more than an hour each way to stay with Jim while I worked.
She didn't do this because she had to, but out of love for Jim and me.
To this day, my mom is my role model.
She is full of life, healthy and active.
She and my Aunt Labetta are always plotting something to add fun to their lives.
They sing at nursing homes, plan vacations, and frequent jaunts to the casino.
Mom is spiritual without being overly religious.
She talks about God as if she has a direct line to heaven, and won't take a bite of her meal until she has asked a blessing.
I feel so lucky that God gave me to her and gave her to me, and I want to wish a happy Mother's Day to the best mom in the world.
Copyright (c) May 2011 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 24, 2011>
One of my favorite shows, The Mentalist, is centered on a man with an extraordinary ability to predict human behavior.
In his job as a consultant, Patrick Jayne the mentalist, always downplays his extraordinary ability as being based on observation.
Jayne denies that he has any psychic abilities and maintains they do not exist in the real world.
His uncanny abilities often leave others shaking their heads and wondering how he really does it.
A lot of people, in general, and psychics in particular claim to have the inside track on predictions.
Most psychic predictions are so general that many events can be interpreted as fulfilling the prophecy.
One of my favorite psychic predictions involved Dolly Parton.
The prediction was that she would fall in love with a 300-pound professional wrestler, write a song called "Headlock on My Heart," and feature her sweetheart in a music video.
This is a detailed and specific prediction that set the psychic up for failure.
Well, Dolly Parton has a sense of humor and when she read this wild prediction, she wrote the song and asked Hulk Hogan to star in the video--complete with fake wedding between Dolly and "Starlight Starbright." Most of us listen to predictions on a daily basis.
Predictions may be minor, but we may plan our wardrobe based on the weather forecast, how far we are willing to travel on vacation based on the price of gasoline, whether to change our retirement fund investments based on the stock market, or whether we want to watch reality TV if our favorite is voted off.
Most important predictions concern our health.
Through no fault of our own, we may be susceptible to certain diseases based on our genetic makeup.
Science has made it possible to predict accurately a person's health outcome of certain diseases through genetic testing.
The APOE gene has long been connected to Alzheimer's.
Which version you have of the APOE gene can mean that you are twenty times more likely to develop Alzheimer's (2 copies of APOE-4) or less likely to develop Alzheimer's (2 copies of APOE-2).
Of course, any person may have any combination of APOE genes and most people do not know their genetic makeup and cannot predict whether they are more likely, or less likely, to develop Alzheimer's.
The APOE gene is one of the genes that breaks down plaques.
The hallmarks of Alzheimer's are two proteins--amyloid beta (causes plaques ) and tau (which causes tangles).
Science is beginning to come together to get to the cause of the plaques and tangles.
* Chris Dobson, Cambridge University, discovered that slight genetic adjustments to amyloid beta protein could make it more soluble.
Insoluble proteins cause plaques.
* Researchers at Brown University have found that the cell process works in diseased brains but is overwhelmed by misfolded amyloid beta proteins.
* Dr. Jeffrey Kelly, Scripps Research Institute, announced the discovery of several genetic mutations that make people more susceptible to Alzheimer's disease.
These genes are more commonly associated with cholesterol metabolism and inflammation.
As the research comes together, the University of California announced a more accurate method of using MRIs and a neuropsychological assessment to predict whether a person will develop Alzheimer's.
The goal of the research is develop a method to diagnose Alzheimer's disease in an early stage before symptoms appear.
When we develop a disease, the crucial prediction is the prognosis.
Without a breakthrough, predicting the outcome of an Alzheimer's diagnosis is unfortunately accurate.
Early detection makes a difference in a hopeful outcome for most diseases.
With scientific breakthroughs from many different sources, Alzheimer's may someday be a disease where early detection means successful treatment.
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher April 2011 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com Sources: Ridley, Matt, Connecting the Pieces of the Alzheimer's Puzzle.
April 2011. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703806304576242781646480162.html http://esciencenews.com/articles/2011/04/11/mri.may.contribute.early.detection.alzheimers
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 18, 2011>
Last week I attended the Missouri Writers' Guild Just Write Conference and coordinated the pitch sessions.
For those of you who are not writers, pitch sessions are when authors try to sign with an agent or editor who can sell their books to major publishers.
Ten agents listened to seven minute pitches from 9 AM to 4 PM.
Some of the authors had worked on their novels for years and in seven minutes tried to convince a professional that their book could be a success.
This process is so important to the authors that they are understandably nervous.
"My goal is to not throw up on my shoes," one author said.
I'm happy to report she came out of the session with clean feet and a smile on her face.
Many just came out shaking their heads no.
"She didn't like it," or "She doesn't know where she can sell the book," were some of the remarks.
These authors have a chance of success because they did not let the fear of failure, or rejection, keep them from pursuing their dreams.
One young author, Christine Karsh, pitched to four different agents and three requested the first thirty to fifty pages of her young adult novel.
She was ecstatic!
Taking a chance on rejected may have landed her a New York agent.
Some of the best authors are never published because they are afraid of rejection.
Every time I submit a story, I realize it may be rejected.
Recently, my local writers' guild announced the stories to be published in this year's anthology.
Of course, some of the stories and poetry had been rejected.
Some authors were angry, one poet said she felt "broken," and another author just laughed and said, "It's hard to know what the judge is going to like."  At our writers' guild, we use a positive attitude about successes and failures.
Often, the same people report both.
"One of my stories won a prize," I'll sometimes say when we report our successes.
"Any failures to report?" the president asked at our last meeting.
"I do," I said.
"The story I submitted to Mysteries of the Ozarks was gently rejected." I've been rejected many times as a writer.
If I didn't take a chance on being rejected, I would never have been published or won any prizes.
I have had stories rejected by a publication and resubmitted them to contests and won more in prizes than the publication paid.
Sometimes our fear of failure can hold us back from meeting our most basic needs in life.
During this time of high unemployment, some people have their job applications rejected so many times that they have become so discouraged they quit looking.
When I was out of work in the early 80s, the situation was the much the same as it is now.
I went on job interview after job interview until I successfully landed a job at an electric cooperative.
I wound up getting a much better job than had I been hired at one of the places that rejected me.
When I became Jim's caregiver, I worried about failure.
I was plagued with doubts.
Would I be able to take care of him?
Could I make the best decisions for him?
Would I be able to handle years of overwhelming responsibility?
I battled with a sense of failure when I finally had to place Jim in long-term care.
I felt like it was my fault when Jim was kicked out of the nursing home.
If I hadn't let icy roads keep me away, would I have been able to ward off the dark mood that led up to the incident?
My biggest doubts were on this date six years ago when Jim died.
Did I fail to find some treatment that would have made a difference?
In my heart I know that everything was done for Jim that could be done, and I'm glad that I didn't let fear of failure make me give up.
Realistically, I knew we were not going to successfully stave off the ultimate destiny of our dementia journey, but it didn't keep me from wanting to make that journey as happy as it could be.
Every morning when we wake up, we can decide whether we want to play it safe and not take any chances, or we can make the most of our God given talents.
If we do not let fear of rejection and failure hold us back, we have unleashed the ultimate power tool for success.
Copyright (c) April 2011 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 11, 2011>
Apparently, there's nothing quite like a ninety degree day in April to make the blossoms burst out in full glory.
Looking out my patio doors just beyond the indestructible artificial plant on the patio table, redbuds provide a splash of color against the shades of springtime green.
Going to pick up my paper, I first noticed tiny delicate flowers on my lawn, right beside the wild garlic that has popped up since the last mowing.
And, oh, yes, the dandelions are in their brilliant yellow stage pretending to be a normal flower.
The Shasta daisies in my flower garden have opened up.
The scent from the two lilac trees wafts along the breeze and I couldn't resist stopping and leaning in for whiff of their fragrance.
It's easier to be optimistic when butterflies flit from blossom to blossom and when birdsongs fill the air.
Blustery winds and bone chilling cold seem like only a shadow left from a bad dream.
God pauses to smile from fluffy clouds against a cerulean sky.
No season is perfect.
Spring is a time of thunderstorms, tornadoes, pesky insects, and reptiles.
April is a time of sad anniversaries, those dates that are firmly ingrained in my mind as a time of nearly unbearable loss.
In a week, I will pause and remember Jim on the six-year anniversary of our journey's end.
Marking the day I knew he would never again sit on the front porch with a cup of coffee and smell lilacs on a sunny April morning.
I have not been too ambitious today, in fact, I'm resting up from my weekend at the Missouri Writers' Guild conference.
I would have slept later this morning, but before she left for work, Shawna had taken pity on my cat and let her come upstairs.
By seven o'clock, Katrina could no longer contain herself, jumped up into my bed, and immediately tried to lie down on my head.
I had spent the morning catching up on email and Facebook.
About noon, I decided to relax with my library book.
Reading made me sleepy, so rather than take a nap, I decided to go outside for a while.
When I walked around the yard, it was easy to feel the essence of family that used to live here--Jim, his mom and dad.
My brother-in-law, Terry, was outside and we looked over the garden spot and talked about the plants that he would plant in the garden.
"Just let me know what you would like me to plant," he said.
"Well, I really liked those peppers last year, and you know I love tomatoes.
Oh, and cucumbers, and zucchini," I said.
My taste buds were singing louder than the birds while I talked about fresh garden vegetables.
"And I'll plant some lettuce," Terry said, "for salads and wilted lettuce." "I'm thinking about planting some herbs," I said, "in a container." I can't quite see me weeding and tilling in the evenings after I get home from work.
"We planted herbs here," he said, pointing to the outer edge of the garden.
"A few of them are coming up from last year.
Here's fennel, garlic, and chives.
I don't know if any of the other herbs will come up again this year." We turned over a few dirty, faded plastic markers from last year.
Terry had left the markers because, like me, he wasn't sure if he could identify the herbs without them being in little plastic bottles plainly labeled.
While we walked around the yard, we talked about the mulberry tree, gooseberry vines and blackberry vines, and then I noticed the big may apples.
"Hey, I bet mushrooms are up," I said.
"Ginger didn't find any yesterday," he said.
As I walked back through the door to finish my inside work, I was smiling.
This would be a great day to just sit outside on the porch and look at all the blooms, butterflies, and signs of spring.
Sure, I still miss Jim, but I know in my heart Jim would not have wanted me to waste a minute of this gorgeous day thinking sad thoughts.
Copyright (c) April 2011 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 7, 2011>
The Department of Veterans Affairs is pleased with the success of their REACH VA pilot program to help caregivers of veterans with Alzheimer's and plans to expand the program nationally.
By relieving caregiver stress, the veterans receive better care at home.
The REACH program provided caregivers: * Twelve in-home visits and telephone counseling sessions * Five telephone support group sessions * A Caregiver Guide with forty-eight behavioral and stress topics * Safety and behavior management education * Training for health and well being The caregivers who had the benefit of these program reported they were less depressed, not as frustrated, and were less burdened on a daily basis with caregiving duties.
Caregivers also reported fewer dementia-related behaviors with the veteran under their care.
I applaud the VA for recognizing the benefits of taking care of the caregiver.
If your loved one with dementia is a veteran, you should check into the REACH VA program.
If your loved one is not a veteran, please contact your local Alzheimer's Association chapter.
They, too, provide training and support for caregivers.
The five core services of an Alzheimer's Association chapter: 1.
Information and Referral 2.
Care consultation 3.
Support Groups 4.
Safety Services 5.
Education Details on these services can be found at http://www.alz.org/we_can_help_local_chapters_wch.asp  As a caregiver, my lifeline was the partnership I formed with my local chapter.
Through their educational programs I gained confidence as a caregiver, knowing I had the benefit of expert knowledge.
I received respite funds to help defray the cost of in-home care.
At support group I learned from the facilitators and from the experiences of other caregivers.
Through my local chapter I registered Jim with Safe Return.
I pored over every newsletter the chapter sent out to learn about new treatments and just to find out what was going on with other caregivers.
The VA has taken a giant step in the right direction to REACH out to caregivers.
Visit www.caregiver.va.gov to learn more about this program.
Caring for a person with dementia can be overwhelming.
The health and wellbeing of the caregiver is crucial to keep our loved ones at home as long as possible.
By knowing and using the resources available in your community, you will be a better caregiver.
Copyright (c) April 2011 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 26, 2011>
The last few weeks have reminded me that for every action there is a reaction.
I'm not talking about Newton's Third Law or even writing advice I've received over the years.
No, I'm talking about everyday common occurrences.
Since I live in the country, I may be a little closer to nature than my city-dwelling friends.
Last Saturday, I looked outside to see five cows grazing in my yard.
I'm not afraid of cows, but noticed one of the "cows" was actually a bull so I stayed inside until the bull decided to butt my satellite dish.
I reacted by yelling in my no-nonsense  voice, "Get out of here!" The big guy turned toward me and gave me a look that indicated he wasn't scared of me at all and didn't budge until my brother-in-law chased them away.
A few days and a few cattle visits later, one-half of my satellite programming quit working.
It seems that half my programming is on one satellite and the other half is on a different one.
My luck, the half that was working had C-Span and info TV, and the half that was out of commission carried American Idol.
For $98, they would look at my dish or I could purchase a service contract for $6 per month with a five-month obligation.
I agreed to the service agreement.
My daughter-in-law walked in while I was finishing my conversation.
She went outside and looked the dish over, tightened up a few loose screws and the TV came back on.
"I don't know how long it will last," she said.
I couldn't see cancelling the appointment so I asked about upgrading to DVR.
I had wanted to do this for months, but hadn't done it.
The technician not only upgraded my system, he programmed in American Idol so that I didn't have to miss it while I was at the Alzheimer's Walk meeting that night.
He planned to come back Wednesday to bury the cable and mount the dish on a pole.
Wednesday morning, I turned on the water to take a shower and the lukewarm water quickly turned cold.
The water heater had quit.
I called my service provider and they said they could come Monday.
Monday?
No hot water until Monday?
A friend of mine came over and pushed the reset button for the water heater, which was all it needed the last time, and sure enough, it started working again.
In fact, the water was boiling hot.
Apparently, the service company reacts more swiftly to boiling water than cold water.
They agreed to come the next day.
The dish man hadn't showed up by almost ten, so I called the 800 number to see what was going on.
While I talked on the phone, I headed down the hallway and almost stepped on a snake.
It didn't matter to me that it was a harmless, ring neck snake--a snake is a snake.
My reaction: I screamed, backtracked, and started telling the guy on the phone and my friend that a snake was IN MY HOUSE.
If I'd been by myself, I might have just moved out until the snake was removed.
The way it was, my friend put his foot on the snake to keep it out of the nearby bedroom, and I brought him an oven mitt to pick it up.
"How did he get in here?" I asked.
"Probably that little crack under your storm door." I had left the entry door open.
Oh, yeah, Jim installed that storm door after he had dementia.
He wanted to angle it slightly, but couldn't understand that he was angling the bottom of the door the wrong direction.
I finally convinced him to leave it straight so that we had a small crack instead of big gap.
It's been quite a week, this week.
A lot of action and reaction going on, for sure.
Today, I'm relaxing and watching the snow come down.
It's hard to believe I was wearing summer clothes earlier this week.
My reaction to the snow?
At least a snake won't be out in this kind of weather.
Copyright (c) March 2011 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 20, 2011>
With only twenty-four hours in a day, I don't get nearly enough done.
I move from project to project trying to keep one step ahead of the next deadline.
I have so many things that I have my heart set on, that sometimes, I just mentally flip a coin to see which project can wait--or be cancelled.
This weekend, I hustled to get a bundle of stories to the post office, and headed to the lake to watch my youngest granddaughter cheer at a basketball game.
It was fun to watch her shake her pom-poms and chant cheers through a megaphone.
My grandson played with his cars on the bleachers where the grownups watched the game and, of course, the cheerleaders.
After lunch at a Mexican restaurant, I decided that while I was in the neighborhood, so to speak, I'd drop in on my brother at the nursing home and see my mom at her nearby apartment.
I called my mom since she doesn't just sit at home, in case someone wants to drop by.
She assured me that she would be home soon.
Rather than wait at her house, I decided to make use of the time to visit my brother, Donnie.
"My roommate needs help," Donnie said when I walked through the door.
His strokes have interfered with his speech, but he was sitting in his wheelchair, bright eyed.
He certainly looked much better than he did a few weeks ago when I visited him in the hospital.
At the hospital, he was so miserable that he just kept saying he wanted to die.
"Okay, I'll go get someone," I told him.
When I returned to the room, he looked at me and said, "Who are you?" "I'm your sister, Linda," I said.
Donnie is nearly blind so I knew it wasn't that he didn't know who I was, he simply could not see me well enough.
"Oh," he said.
When the aide came in, she mentioned that Donnie's light wasn't working.
This started him on a rant about everything that wasn't working in his room: the nightlight, the door that wouldn't shut on his closet, and his opinion of housekeeping for not fixing everything.
"I'll tell them," the aide said, making her exit when she realized Donnie was past teasing and had become angry.
"I can't walk, can't move my arms, and can't fix the things that are wrong.
They haven't even turned my calendar," he said.
Sure enough, the calendar with giant numbers was still on February.
I flipped the calendar and sat down on his bed.
Now that he was a little calmer, I told him how much better he looked.
I asked him if he was eating and he started telling me about refusing to eat the "pre-chewed" food as he called it.
I knew what Donnie was talking about because Jim's food was eventually "mechanically softened" and later pureed.
It never looked appetizing, and I told Donnie how my niece referred to Jim's "mystery meat" when we couldn't determine what kind of meat it was.
"Are they giving you regular water now too?" I asked.
"Hell, yes," he said.
"I told them to leave that thickening out.
That stuff just made me thirstier."  That reminded me of when Jim strangled and choked too easily and his liquids were thickened.
I always thought that his thirst could not be quenched and felt bad that he couldn't have his big travel cup filled with ice water.
After our visit, I hugged Donnie and told him I wouldn't stay away so long next time.
"I want to spend more time with my family," I said.
"Family is the most important thing," he told me.
"If it wasn't for mom and my brothers and sisters, I would just give up." He wiped tears from his eyes with his left hand, the one he uses the best.
By the time I left the nursing home, the soft rain had changed to a torrential downpour.
I didn't let the rain delay me from visiting my mom and merrily splashed through the puddles of water on her walkway.
When I set my heart on it, a thunderstorm and downpour won't even slow me down.
Copyright (c) March 2011 by Linda Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 13, 2011>
I remember having a discussion with a friend who thought I was crazy when I mentioned the full moon caused chaos at the nursing home.
"That's an old wives' tale," he said.
And he laughed at me.
"Hey, if you don't believe me, just ask anyone who works in a nursing home," I said.
I've always been a skeptic about the moon's influence on human behavior until Jim was a resident at a nursing home.
No one had to tell me when the moon was full--it was obvious from the behavior.
Residents were restless and agitated at a complete different level.
Okay, so I've done a lot of internet research and the scientific sites tend to scoff at the idea that the moon, full or otherwise, would influence behavior.
As one site points out, the moon is there all the time whether the sun reflects off it or not.
Astrologers, not astronomers, think the March 19 SuperMoon may cause an increase in natural disasters.
In fact, some think the influence of the approaching SuperMoon may have had something to do with the disaster in Japan.
I'm not one to align myself with astrologists, so I'm not going to propose that the SuperMoon has anything to do with earthquakes, but I wonder if it will affect human behavior.
Life sometimes teaches us things that science can't prove.
While trolling around the internet, I came across something that makes sense to my practical side.
It started with one person who posted that her sleep was disturbed during the full moon.
She slept fine the rest of the month, but during the full moon, she could not sleep.
Several other people reported the same problem.
Doesn't this make sense?
Scientific studies show that our sleep is disturbed when we have lights on in our bedrooms from TVs, clocks, cell phones, and all other electronic equipment.
The less light, the higher quality our sleep is.
At the nursing home, every room had a window.
On full moon nights, moonlight would make the outside brighter than any other time of the month and disturb sleep.
Maybe it was a cumulative effect on sleep building up to the full moon.
I don't know about you, but I tend toward, well, a little lunacy when I'm sleep deprived.
My reasoning skills are not as sharp, and I certainly lean toward my cranky side.
If anyone scientifically charted my behavior, it might well ebb and flow with the moon's fullness.
The moon will be closer than it has been in eighteen years.
I know it's going to disturb my sleep because it is supposed to be spectacular to see, and I want to see it.
You may be like my friend and most scientists, but before you scoff make note of the behavior of those around you.
If nothing else, they may react to the weird looks you are giving them.
I can't help but speculate that the SuperMoon might be like a full moon on overdrive.
I believe people's behavior will be--interesting.
The SuperMoon will be something to behold for believers in the power of moon--and for people watchers everywhere.
Copyright (c) March 2011 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 7, 2011>
Those of us who have been following Alzheimer's research have learned to listen to any news with optimistic caution.
The latest research at Tel Aviv University shows promise for a nasal spray that will work on stroke as well as Alzheimer's.
Is this a case of everything old is new again?
When Jim first developed dementia, I read every piece of information I could about research.
I checked out drug trials and tried to get him enrolled in an Alzheimer's vaccine study.
I remember reading that best way to introduce a vaccine into the brain was through nasal spray.
No, I don't remember exactly what year it was, but Jim was living at home so it must have been at least eleven years ago.
Don't get me wrong, I'm excited about this study.
Using animal models, researchers discovered that the drug introduced through nasal spray stimulated the body's own immune system to repair brain damage caused by Alzheimer's and strokes related to Alzheimer's.
The numbers being thrown around are that this research drug could help 80% of people with Alzheimer's.
This news would be more exciting if the drug was not so far from being available at the local pharmacy.
In fact, the drug has not been used on humans.
Can this be the breakthrough to unlock the mystery of Alzheimer's?
I certainly hope it is.
Just like the vaccine studies I tried to get Jim into more than a dozen years ago, this drug shows promise of reversing the damage caused by the disease.
Does anyone else find it a strange coincident that the acronym for the Tel Aviv University is TAU?
It first caught my eye when I saw a report that began "TAU researchers develop a vaccine..." The hallmarks of Alzheimer's are the plaques and tangles that form in the brain.
Most research targets removing the beta-amyloid plaques.
At first, I thought the statement meant these researchers were concentrating on the tangles which are made up of twisted fibers of tau.
With the woeful funding the USA provides for Alzheimer's research, it is not surprising that the most exciting news to come along in several years was from Israel.
The lack of funding for Alzheimer's research means that many of the best and brightest USA researchers concentrate on better-funded studies.
Only time will tell whether the vaccine will be the long awaited Alzheimer's cure, or whether it will be another disappointment to the millions who wait, and wait, and wait.
What are they waiting for?
They are waiting for that very first Alzheimer's survivor.
No disease should be without hope.
I know that I desperately searched for a ray of hope for the bleak prognosis Jim was given.
Why have researchers found effective treatments for AIDS, many types of cancer, heart disease and other diseases, but come up empty with Alzheimer's?
A lot has to do with the priorities and a serious commitment to stopping a killer disease.
Alzheimer's has a reputation of being a disease for the elderly, and we all know that no one is going to live forever.
Early onset Alzheimer's and related dementias affect people younger than age sixty-five--sometimes decades younger.
Regardless of age, Alzheimer's is a life-altering disease that requires a serious commitment to caregiving and palliative care that can stretch over twenty years.
Today, Alzheimer's is a fatal, irreversible brain disease.
The 5.3 million Americans with Alzheimer's and 79 million boomers at risk should be encouraged by the TAU study.
I believe that eventually a study is going to come along that can stop Alzheimer's in its insidious tracks.
Is it this one?
Maybe, maybe not.
Alzheimer's is a worldwide problem, and every country in the world, including the USA, should participate in finding a solution.
At a time when our National Institute of Health funding is on the budget chopping block, we must insist that Alzheimer's research move forward.
Copyright (c) March 2011 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 28, 2011>
Life can become so routine that a simple change of scenery can help us gain a new perspective.
The change doesn't have to be drastic; it can be subtle.
I usually work on my netbook in the living room.
I have a desk that sits near the patio doors and it is an inspiring place to sit in the summertime.
Or, I might use my lap desk and work from the comfort of my couch.
This weekend, I decided to work in the kitchen, which has a view of the house next door (people watching), the road (car/tractor watching), a field (cow watching), and my sister-in-law's bird feeders (bird watching).
Geeze, it sure seems like I'm doing a lot of watching, doesn't it?
So why would you care about my change of scenery?
It makes a difference only as it applies to you.
If you are a caregiver, a change of scenery is probably something you crave--like a tropical isle far away from your responsibilities.
Doesn't that sound good?
Although it may sound like paradise, it most likely seems impossible.
Maybe a complete getaway isn't on your possibility radar, whether it's because of your responsibilities or an economic issue.
What you can do is something a little simpler to provide a change of scenery.
As a caregiver, you need respite.
You need time to regroup and refresh so that you can continue to be a good caregiver.
Sometimes, just an afternoon getaway with friends and family, or to just have some alone time can give you a new perspective.
A fresh view can revitalized your thinking and make you a better caregiver.
I visited with a caregiver who said she wanted to watch her dad so her mother could have some time away.
She had offered, even pleaded with her mom, to let her help.
Her mother insisted that she hire a caregiver, but couldn't find one she trusted.
"What can we do?" the woman asked me.
"She just won't let us help, but I think she's about to collapse." "Try a different angle," I suggested.
"Tell her you want to spend some alone time with your dad.
Let her know this is something that would make you happy.
Does he like to ride in the car?" "Oh, yes," she said.
"He loves to go for drives." "Take him for a drive and stop at a park for a picnic.
It will make him happier, and will give your mom some time to do something she likes to do." Had I talked to the mother, I would have encouraged her to take help when it is offered.
If a caregiver keeps a list handy, it is easy to find something for family and friends to do.
Do you need something from the grocery store?
Would your neighbor like to mow the grass?
People really do want to help, but they don't know what to do.
If you are the person offering help to a caregiver, who don't ever accept--look around to see how you can help.
Can you help with some chores?
Do you know of an activity that fits the interests of the person with dementia?
Did he like to fish?
Maybe you could take him fishing to give the caregiver a break.
Did she like to cook?
Bring the ingredients and make cookies together while you shoo the caregiver away.
I was healthy and in my forties when Jim developed dementia.
Our children were grown and my employer allowed me some flexibility so that I was able to keep on working.
I had a lot of family support from both Jim's family and mine.
When I needed to hire professionals, I used respite funds from my local Alzheimer's Association chapter to help offset the expense.
At times, caregiver responsibilities were overwhelming for me, and I couldn't even imagine how someone in his or her eighties could take care of a spouse.
Alzheimer's can last for years and too often the caregiver gives out before the person with dementia.
This is especially true of the selfless caregiver who never takes a break.
Being on duty 24/7 can break anyone, no matter how strong.
If you are a caregiver who never takes a break or enjoys a change of scenery from time to time, ask yourself this important question, "Who will take care of my loved one if my health fails?" In this situation, caregiving is all or nothing.
If you do it all, you could very easily get to the point where you can't do any of it.
You are headed for a personal mental health crisis if you become mired down with responsibility and give up the activities you love.
If you are in crisis, what good are you to your loved one who depends on you?
Copyright (c) Feb 2011 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 22, 2011>
The thing about an almost 70 degree day in February, the barbeque grills come out from hiding.
Football season may be over and there's no excuse to tailgate, so we just tailgate in our own backyards.
This kind of day is a gift of a summer day in the dead of winter.
Smoke drifts to the sky, the odor of hot and spicy, tangy sauce, sizzling hot meat, or grilled vegetables brings the scent of summer.
"It's like a summer night," I said.
"Yeah, except there aren't any bugs," my friend observed.
"I can't argue with that," I said.
I walked to the edge of the deck to gaze up at the full moon and twinkling stars.
"I've heard that city lights can keep people from seeing the stars." As I stood there looking up at the sky, I thought about how seldom I take time to admire the beauty of a night sky.
With all the things that change in our lives, people coming and going, days filled with work, evenings filled with commitments, and nights that seem way too short for sleeping, the night sky remains unchanged.
Some of the beauty twinkling above could have burned out a million years ago, but their light and essence can still be admired on a February night in 2011.
Looking at the sky is like looking at history--theirs and mine.
The sky looks the same as it did when I was a child lying on one of my grandma's quilts thrown on the front yard of my grandparent's little house north of Stover.
The sounds of music filled the air as my uncles played their guitars and sang country songs to blend with a backdrop of cicadas, bullfrogs and whippoorwills.
Those were simple days.
As a child, I never knew the pain of loss or the taste of failure.
I didn't know what I didn't know.
I had never known anyone that had died.
I guess I just thought we would live forever and the days of summer would stretch to the edges of the earth to infinity.
Sickness, pain, and sorrow seemed as many light years away as a distant star.
When I drove home after the backyard barbeque, I turned up the volume on my XM Radio.
My son had driven my car and left it on Channel 10 which plays old time country music.
I was just considering turning it to a different channel but couldn't resist listening to the Grand Ole Opry staring Hank Williams, Senior, not Junior.
I just caught the very end of the show and listening to the hillbilly twang, reminded me of how everyone spoke when I was a child.
The program went back to other old time country music.
One thing about country music--it's usually tells a sad story or laments lost love.
Too often the songs on Channel 10, are ones that Jim sang.
Merle Haggard sang the lyrics, "always wanting you, but never having you" and I had an ah-ha moment.
Although I always assumed the song was about unrequited love, I suddenly realized it could be about lost love.
How many of us know the empty ache of realization that we will never, ever be able to hold a loved one in our arms again?
We can feel that sense of loss when changes brought about by dementia have erased the person we knew.
We feel the emptiness of knowing he is still there in some ways, but vanished in others.
Jim's music had always been such a part of him that when he lost his ability to play his guitar, we both lost a chunk of our lives.
It was a change we didn't want.
Maybe when too much has changed, we should look to the sky to remind ourselves that our lives are only a small speck compared to eternity.
The sky looks the same to me as it did when I was a kid and looks the same as when my grandparents were kids.
When everything changes around us, we need to take a deep breath of fresh air and take comfort in watching the same moon glide across the heavens and knowing that we can't count the stars.
Copyright (c) February 2011 by L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 12, 2011>
According to the calendar, February is the shortest month.
Based on my experience, I consider it to be the longest shortest month of the year.
There's something about the winter that makes it easier to have a bad day, or even a bad week.
Slick roads, snow piled to the sky, and frozen water pipes become the rule instead of the exception.
I have a lot of company when I say that February has not been good for me.
Last weekend was great with some good family time.
I started the workweek with my day off--sounds good so far doesn't it?
Everything was going great until I washed a load of clothes and the water backed up into the basement.
I figured something was frozen up and the forecast was for a week of freezing weather.
The week went downhill from there.
I was behind at work because of last week's blizzard and to top it all off, computer programming glitches stalled my progress and our annual audit fractured my concentration.
I spent a week battling a constant headache, nerves and depression.
I was behind schedule and no matter how hard I struggled, I could not catch up.
For the first time in thirty years, I didn't meet my deadline.
Somewhere in the back of my mind I knew that my tough week was only a hiccup compared to the months and years of trying times when I was a primary caregiver.
When I remembered February 2001, I felt like mentally slapping my own face for being so downhearted over the past week.
A decade ago, Jim had been kicked out of the nursing home and spent the entire month of February in a hospital for "regenerations" while we scrambled to find a new home for him.
The hospital changed Jim's medication and he was not doing well.
Medicine that was supposed to level out his moods sent him into a constant state of agitation and he took his hostility out on anyone around him.
My sons and I made the two hour (each way) trip nearly every day to check on him.
It was hard to convince the doctors that Jim wasn't normally a violent person and that he had changed drastically since they had prescribed an antipsychotic drug.
We knew that as long as Jim stalked the halls in a mean mood, we would never find a nursing home to take him.
I even checked into "behavior units" and didn't like what I saw at all.
I can honestly say that February 2001 was a bad, bad month.
It was a time of uncertainty and constant worry that I wouldn't be able to find a safe environment for Jim.
One day after a particularly harrowing outing, my oldest son and I insisted that the doctor take Jim off the antipsychotic drug.
Jim steadily improved after the medication change and as February came to a close, a local nursing home gave him a second chance.
It was months before I conquered my fear that some kind of incident would happen, and we would have to find another place for him.
After putting things in perspective, I realize that although the last week was challenging, it was not overwhelming in the scheme of things.
Five days later, life is looking much better.
My son fixed the drainage problem and today is supposed to be a balmy forty degrees.
Snow is melting so fast I can hear it dripping off the roof.
I'm back to my optimistic self and confident that everything is going to be okay.
I can surely conquer this month.
After all, February is the shortest month and this year isn't even a leap year.
With Monday being Valentine's Day, I'm pretty sure I'll have enough chocolate to make it doable.
Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher, February 2011 http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/,
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 7, 2011>
On Tuesday the blizzard brought the Midwest to a screeching halt.
We were warned and most of us worked on our severe storm plans, but others remained clueless.
When the blizzard came to town, businesses closed down and sent their workers scurrying to the shelter of their homes, or to the homes of family and friends to wait out the storm which surely would not be as bad as predicted.
Only it was, and then some.
Instead of falling like a normal snow, the wind blew it sideways.
And it snowed without respite through whiteout conditions, and before you know it, we had a real old-fashioned blizzard.
It was certainly a good time to be indoors looking out the window at the snow that seemed to be on a mission.
It was quickly dubbed Snow-maggaden, Snowpocalypse, and my personal favorite--Snownami.
After the blizzard raged all day and throughout most of the night, the world was covered with snow dunes.
Ripples cascaded across yards and small objects collected drifts that stood several feet tall.
The snowscape greeted the day with an in-your-face claim on the land.
The world lay silent in awe of the volume of snow that dared snowplows to find the roads buried beneath its pristine covering.
Interstate 70 was closed from Kansas City to St. Louis, and the rest of the state's roadways lay impassable.
Snowplows plugged away at clearing main highways first.
Other roads were cleared by farmers on their tractors.
Even most state roads had tractor plowed single lanes, but no traffic during the morning hours because vehicles were snow covered lumps in driveways and alongside the roads.
People were snowed out, people were snowed in.
It brought out the best of people with neighbors helping neighbors and the worst in people who couldn't understand why stores were still closed in the aftermath.
Then began the slow, tedious process of digging out.
Newspapers and television stations posted pictures of good Samarians wielding shovels and using tractors or trucks with blades to clear driveways and walks for others.
By Friday, my country road had been cleared the width of a car.
I was at work when I received the good news that my son, grandson, and a friend had spent hours clearing snow from my driveway and the walk to my door.
Locally, an elderly man died Friday when he got stuck on a side road and tried to walk home.
His body was found in a snowdrift.
Nationally, an eighty-eight year old Louisiana man with Alzheimer's wandered from his home in search of the bathroom to change his clothes.
His jeans and shirt were found outside the door, and a few hours later his body was discovered.
Perhaps one of the most disturbing parts of the story is that although the man had been in a nursing home a few years ago, he seemed to get "better" and was moved back home.
Inclement weather is dangerous for anyone, but for confused people it can be deadly.
Here we are a week later and snow is still piled up along driveways and roadways.
The only bright spot in this entire scenario is that Punxsutawney Phil did not see his shadow which means an early spring.
I hope that Phil's prediction isn't just true for Pennsylvania since the sun was shining bright in Missouri the day after the blizzard--Ground Hogs Day, of course.
Spring cannot be too early for me!
I'm tired of the snow and the cold weather, but it seems like the snow and cold aren't ready to move on just yet.
The forecast is for more snow and cold this week before a warming trend next weekend.
The calendar, like life, has its seasons and some are more challenging than others.
One thing that can be said for the blizzard, it reinforced how blessed I am to be surrounded by family and friends.
Thanks to them, I've come through the snownami unscathed, although, I admit it wouldn't hurt my feelings if another "fifty year storm" holds off for at least that long.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 30, 2011>
I woke up at 3 a.m. this morning with my mind spinning about another storm on the horizon, something important I should have done Friday, and my escalating To-Do List.
Today should be a fun day for my sisters and me to celebrate Mom's 84th birthday.
My alarm was set for 7 a.m.--late enough to catch up on my sleep, but early enough to meet up with my family.
I tossed and turned for about an hour and decided to just get up.
Might as well go for the middle of the night awakening whole heartedly, so I put on a pot of coffee and sat down to catch up on some reading.
I read the latest Missouri Conservation Magazine cover-to-cover.
Then, as the first streaks of dawn lit up the sky, I turned on my netbook to read the Alzheimer's Association's Boomer Report I had downloaded a few days ago.
As a longtime advocate, the information in the report was familiar to me.
Each year we get an advocates guide that tells us that Alzheimer's is the 6th leading cause of death, and that it is the only disease in the top 10 without prevention, treatment, or hope of a cure.
As an advocate, I also knew that the government's research investment in Alzheimer's is $480 million per year compared to $3 billion for HIV/AIDS, $4 billion for heart disease and $6 billion for cancer.
This report is written for boomers.
We boomers are the pragmatic generation that never wanted the truth sugarcoated.
We grew up with the threat of nuclear annihilation and bought the records to make Barry McGuire's "Eve of Destruction" a #1 Billboard hit.
It takes a lot to scare a boomer, but the title of this report--Generation Alzheimer's: the defining disease of the baby boomers--seems pretty scary to me.
I find the statistics alarming now, but when you see what they will become without a cure it offers up a bleak future to 10 million of us boomers.
Caring for a person with Alzheimer's is exhausting, emotionally draining, and expensive.
For every $100 the government spends on Alzheimer's research, they spend $25,000 on care.
With the economy, $172 billion spent on caring for people with Alzheimer's seems like a strain on the budget, but it comes breaking apart at the seams with a projected $1 trillion cost by 2050.
A person with Alzheimer's costs Medicare three times more and Medicaid six times more.
Only 4% of 80-year-old Americans need long term care, but when a person of that age group has Alzheimer's, 75% of them will require nursing home care.
Yes, I knew all the statistics so I'm not sure why I found the report so depressing today.
Maybe it's because as a boomer I know how we learned to overcome our fears and tended to think ourselves invincible.
At least we always thought that maybe bad things happened to other people while we continue to cruise through life on a wish and a prayer.
Maybe my depression comes from the thought that although millions of us know how life changing Alzheimer's is for the person with the disease and their family circle, we cannot motivate enough advocates to get an increase in research dollars.
We boomers have made an impact on the world throughout our entire lives.
We strained the education system, we flooded the job market, and now we threaten to bring on an economic and emotional crisis as we age.
Rather than being the generation defined by Alzheimer's, we could be the generation that defeats Alzheimer's.
It isn't going to happen through protest songs.
It's going to happen only if we have enough advocates to take up the banner and deliver the message to congress as often as it takes.
We boomers need to take advantage of our numbers to brighten the future.
We have to pool our stubbornness and stick-to-itiveness until we get the job done.
Copyright (c) Jan 2011 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 23, 2011>
On this snowy Sunday morning, I sat in my pajamas watching the CBS News Sunday Morning when Barry Petersen began to tell Jan's story.
They showed archived clips of beautiful, vivacious Jan reporting the news both in the studio and on location.
Now at fifty-five, Jan has advanced Alzheimer's and lives in assisted living.
Jan's speech is hesitant, and her words travel in a circular pattern of incomplete thoughts and repetitive phrases.
She talks to the woman in the mirror and wants her to go to lunch with her.
When she realizes the woman isn't invited, she says goodbye to her and walks away.
Seeing the human story of Jan makes the statistics come to life.
Approximately 250,000 families have a loved one with early onset Alzheimer's.
When the onset of the disease occurs before a person is sixty-five years old, it is considered early or younger onset.
Barry interviewed another woman with early onset Alzheimer's.
Pat, fifty-two, was diagnosed six years ago.
"My time's getting shorter," she said.
She is determined to enjoy life while she can.
She is adamant that when she enters into the late stages she doesn't want her beloved granddaughters to visit her.
She wants to spare her grandchildren the heartbreak of visiting a grandmother who does not recognize them.
The disease changes family dynamics, and children and spouses begin to feel like parents to their loved ones.
Caregivers learn the meaning of unconditional love when their loved ones become mired in a disease that erases memories of closest family members.
Barry explains why Jan's story is so personal to him.
He and Jan were married in 1985 while she was a reporter.
"She embraced each new city as an adventure," he said.
Jan sits on the patio and when Barry arrives, she hugs him.
They sit and Barry asks her about her husband.
"I do love him," Jan says in halting words.
She continues to speak of her husband in third person not recognizing Barry as the husband she vaguely remembers.
When Barry asks Jan for her husband's name, she stammers and then pronounces that he is "Mr.
Happy." Barry went through the steps of thousands of caregivers before him--he took care of his wife at home, then hired caregivers to help, and finally placed her in assisted living.
The story concludes with Barry introducing Mary Nell, a widow that has become his companion.
Mary Nell knew a relationship with Barry encompassed a relationship with Jan and said she could not love Barry without loving Jan.
They have become a family of three.
Jan was a person who loved life and lived it to the fullest.
Barry has written Jan's Story: Love Lost to the Long Goodbye of Alzheimer's to honor the woman he has shared his life with, and who has been his life, for more than twenty-five years.
Barry realizes that many people will not understand his relationship with Mary Nell and how loving her does not diminish his love for Jan. "To embrace life, I must go on," Barry said at the conclusion of the segment.
Copyright (c) Jan. 2011 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 18, 2011>
  One of the hardest decisions a caregiver will ever have to make is when to seek professional care for a loved one.
The next big decision is where to find that care and what options are available.
The only way to decide which option is best for you is to tour the available facilities and get a feel for how well your loved one will fit into the environment.
I remember taking those tours.
It was pretty much like interviewing for a job I didn't want.
It was much easier to see what was wrong rather than what was right.
Even places that had good recommendations didn't fare well under my jaded examination.
When I found places I thought might be acceptable, I put Jim on a waiting list.
In 1999, Sylvia G. Thompson Residential Center was considering a new concept in Alzheimer's care based on small groups of residents in a homelike setting.
I looked at the plans and put Jim on that waiting list too.
It so happened that the timing wasn't right for the proposed unit at Sylvia G. Thompson and their project would be on hold for another decade.
Thursday night I went to an open house for the Memory Care unit at Sylvia G. Thompson Residence Center and the finished product is stunning.
An atrium, complete with a sky-lights in a high ceiling, is the centerpiece of the Memory Care wing.
The indoor gardens have water features and an abundance of plants that include an orange tree, a pea bush, and lush greenery to give the area an outdoor feeling.
The walking track eclipses the atrium and is designed to give a wandering resident plenty of room to stretch his or her legs.
Wicker furniture is arranged in a separate sun porch area.
On the night of the open house the view from the large windows looked like a scene from a winter wonderland.
Between the gardens comfortable arm chairs await those who just want to sit and relax.
Tables are set up with games--checkers, dominos, and a jigsaw puzzle.
The four corners are staked out as separate neighborhoods.
Five residents will have their homes in each neighborhood.
These five neighbors will live in rooms surrounding their living area, kitchen and dining room.
The table seats six because a caregiver will be assigned to each neighborhood and will eat with the residents.
The common areas are decorated with photography by Faith Bemiss, a local artist.
Her beautiful photographs serve practical function by helping residents find their rooms.
A resident might live in the pelican room--a small framed photograph of pelicans is beside the door and a larger pelican picture decorates the room.
Each of the twenty rooms has a different photographical theme.
We may not be able to find a home with all the features of Memory Care at Sylvia G. Thompson, but we can choose a home that meets our loved ones needs at the time.
As the disease progresses, those needs may change.
In our case, Jim was in the first home for less than a year.
Then, we found a long-term care facility in our hometown which made it easier for me to see him each day.
We decorated Jim's room with NASCAR and Kansas City Chief's posters and bedspreads to reflect his interests.
Jim lived at the second home for a little over four years until his death in 2005.
Jim was in an Alzheimer's unit at both facilities.
Both of these units became his home and his neighborhood while he was living there.
I remember one stay in the hospital, Jim told me he wanted to "go home." Since Jim was mostly silent, I knew he was good and tired of being in an unfamiliar place.
When he was dismissed I took him back to the Alzheimer's unit.
He was satisfied to be on familiar turf, and to be back in his own neighborhood.
Copyright (c) Jan. 2011, L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 9, 2011>
Alzheimer's Advocates have cause to celebrate with the presidential endorsement of the National Alzheimer's Project Act (NAPA).
Why is this Act so important and why have advocates put so much effort into a national coordinated effort to staunch the Alzheimer's tsunami headed our way?
Aging baby boomers.
Age is the No.
1 risk factor of Alzheimer's and statically speaking the aging baby boomers drastically increase those at risk for Alzheimer's.
For the next 19 years, Boomers turn 65 at the rate of 10,000 per day!
By 2050 the care cost of Americans with Alzheimer's will skyrocket from the current $172 billion to $1 trillion.
What is the purpose of NAPA?
According to my 2010 Alzheimer's Action Summit Advocate's Guide, NAPA will-- * Launch a campaign within the federal government to overcome Alzheimer's disease.
* Establish an inter-agency Advocacy Council to create a coordinated National Alzheimer's Disease Plan * Comprehensively address the federal government's efforts on Alzheimer's research, care, institutional services, and home- and community-based programs.
* Accelerate the development of treatments that would prevent, halt or reverse the course of Alzheimer's disease.
* Decrease health disparities by ensuring ethnic and racial populations at higher risk for Alzheimer's receive much-needed care and services In a time when we worry about the national debt, finding effective treatment or a cure for Alzheimer's disease is more important than ever.
For each person with Alzheimer's, Medicaid costs are 9 times higher and Medicare payments are 3 times higher.
I have been an advocate for more than a decade.
I don't suppose I would have ever bothered to put so much time, effort, money, and passion into such a cause if I hadn't personally seen the destruction caused by dementia.
When Jim was diagnosed with an Alzheimer's type of dementia, it changed both our lives, and the lives of our extended family and network of friends.
Living with dementia is something our minds cannot comprehend if we don't have that personal involvement.
The thought of having a 50/50 chance of developing Alzheimer's for those who live to be 85 should be cause for concern for anyone who hopes to live a long, healthy life.
Other rarer types of dementia show up in much younger people.
Jim was 49 when he developed corticobasal degeneration.
Younger people develop frontotemporal dementia and can develop Alzheimer's, especially the hereditary form.
Alzheimer's should concern all of us.
It's not just a disease of the elderly that involves some forgetfulness.
It's not a joke for late-night TV.
It is a devastating, fatal brain disorder that is financially and emotionally draining for the entire family.
It is a time of ongoing loss and sadness and a disease I wouldn't wish on my worst enemy.
NAPA means this country has finally recognized that Alzheimer's needs aggressive action tempered by a comprehensive plan.
Unless we use adequate resources to find a cure for Alzheimer's, we face our future with trepidation.
The Alzheimer's Association credits 300,000 advocates for passing NAPA.
More than five million Americans have Alzheimer's.
Think how much more progress we could make if each person with Alzheimer's had one family member who became an advocate.
If that were the case, the tsunami would be millions of people concentrating their efforts on finding a cure for Alzheimer's now, not at some unforeseeable time in the future.
Copyright Jan. 2011, L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/ sources: www.alz.org Alzheimer's Action Summit 2010 "My Experience, Our Voice" Advocate's Guide
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, December 31, 2010>
The year end and the New Year are like a two-sided mirror, and I stand in front of it.
In one side I see my own reflection,  to see the other side I have to step through the looking glass.
The decision is mine, do I continue to look at a reflection of the familiar, or take a leap of faith and step through to a new world?
What's on the other side?
Maybe it is just more of the same, but it could be a strange new world where nothing is familiar.
It could mean that someone raised the stakes when I wasn't looking, or it could be a wondrous land unlike anything I've ever known.
Either way, through the looking glass means excitement and adventure--the reflection is security and safety.
But does the mirror reflect only the familiar?
I'm reminded of an exercise in my Train the Trainer: Building Creative Caregivers workbook.
The "Mirror Exercise" is designed to sensitize participants to how hard it is for a person with dementia do perform simple tasks.
The Mirror Exercise (from Building Creative Caregivers): * You need a hand mirror, pen and paper * Hold the pen in one hand and the mirror in the other, reflecting side out slightly above your shoulder * Locate your hand and pen in the mirror * Looking only in the mirror, draw a house on the paper * After you draw your picture write your name on the paper Try the exercise and you learn that sometimes you are in unfamiliar territory even when you don't take a chance.
The reflection may not be as safe as stepping through the looking glass.
Life changes and evolves every day.
Sometimes the changes are internal as we struggle with meeting our daily emotional needs.
We face external changes as we wake up each day to find our world has changed.
Sometimes the changes are upheavals--the test results came back positive, a loved one passes away, a home is destroyed by fire or tornado; while other changes are subtle--another gray hair, bad dreams, indigestion, gained another two pounds.
The only thing we can really count on is that today will not be exactly like yesterday or the same as tomorrow.
We cannot stand still while everything moves around us.
Instead, we are swept along life's journey at breakneck speed.
So back to the original question--look at the reflection or step through the looking glass?
Maybe it doesn't make any difference.
It depends on what we see in the reflection and whether we can look at it from a little different perspective to keep it interesting.
If I step through the looking glass, the world may change drastically--for better or worse.
If my choice is through the looking glass, I must be sure the entire goal is not to find my way back.
This choice doesn't have to be made on New Year's Day, it needs to be made when the time is right.
I've stepped through the looking glass before, and when I can do it without regrets, I'll step through it again.
For now, I'm happy looking at the reflection in a different way.
That's enough excitement and adventure for me.
Copyright (c) December 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 26, 2010>
Ever thought about how the day after Christmas is so different from the night before our biggest holiday?
Before is filled with anticipation, excitement, and preparation.
The day after is clean up the mess time, work on leftovers, procrastinate about undecking the halls (sounds like a New Year's Day project), and maybe a twinge of depression that the big day is over.
This year, the day after fell on Sunday, so the normal "day after" seems to me like it's on overdrive.
The house is quiet--holiday music seems so "yesterday" and I just couldn't Face the Nation this morning.
Why would anyone want to hear that squabbling on the day after Christmas?
Overnight, more snow fell--okay, we already had a white Christmas so I'm ready for it to stop.
I decided to stay home instead of braving the slick roads to go to church this morning.
Instead, I watched Joel Osteen on TV.
Joel's message this morning, "Enjoy the Journey," really hit home with me.
The gist of his message was how we get too busy to enjoy the simple things in life.
He talked about how we rush through life in anticipation of the big events and don't have time to savor the small moments that make the memories.
We need to squeeze time in our busy schedules to spend with family and loved ones, instead of zapping our energy with work and obligations.
I guess if a busy man like Joel Osteen can take time to savor the moment, it should be easy for me.
When I examine my life, it seems to be mostly hectic, and too often hectic turns to frantic.
I've just kept piling on obligations until they've taken on a life of their own.
For the past week, I haven't worried about all the things I should be doing, but have pretty much just shoved them aside.
For once, my holiday has been respite from responsibilities.
Holidays were especially hard during the ten years of Jim's dementia.
Christmas activities pretty much confused him and he didn't like the house being changed with decorations.
When he was in the nursing home, he enjoyed the small Christmas tree I put in his room.
Each year is different in some way.
If nothing else, the kids or grandkids are getting older.
After our family get-together this year, my oldest grandson got behind the wheel of the family vehicle to drive them home.
It doesn't seem that long ago that we bought him Woody and Buzz Lightyear for Christmas.
While some really relate to the ho-ho-ho and jolly part of Christmas, others are filled with dread as they struggle to establish new traditions, or wonder how they will put on a happy face for everyone else.
There's a lot of internal and external pressure to be merry at Christmas.
It's expected.
As far as Christmas, I think I'll just go with Joel Osteen's idea to "Enjoy the Journey." Each Christmas is different, but that doesn't mean it is necessarily better or worse.
The Christmases that may have seemed the most challenging at the time yield happy moments that turn into cherished memories.
I can still see Jim wearing his Kansas City Chief's shirt, mesmerized by the fiber optic tree.
When I walked into his room, sometimes he would turn to me and his eyes would light up.
Life's journey seems to be flying by and Christmas is a mile marker.
Christmas is over, again.
Now, it's time to think about how to make the most of the 365 days of 2011.
No one but me can put the "happy" in my New Year, but I might as well start with this day after Christmas.
No time like the present to make a memory.
Copyright (c) December 2010 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 20, 2010>
For the first time, I wrote a letter to the President of the United States!
I asked him to sign the National Alzheimer's Project Act (NAPA).
It's not that I never had anything to say to the President before, but no issue ever motivated me enough to actually write.
Besides, you always know he isn't going to read his letters anyway.
I'm sure he isn't too concerned about one person's opinion, but if he gets a million emails sent to him, they will be a nudge in the right direction.
This Act has been in the works since 2007.
During our legislative visits at the 2010 Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum my granddaughter, my friend Cindy, and I talked to our representatives and senators to ask them to support NAPA.
After 1,000 advocate meetings, 50,000 emails, 10,000 phone calls, and 110,000 signatures gathered during the Alzheimer's Breakthrough Ride, both the Senate and House of Representatives passed the bill establishing NAPA.
NAPA will be a coordinated effort to use our resources on research for a cure and effective treatment, provide appropriate home, clinical, and institutional care for the 5.3 million persons with Alzheimer's, improve community based programs, and support for families.
In my opinion, NAPA is the most important legislative act for families who are struggling with an Alzheimer's diagnosis.
After a series of tests, a doctor told my forty-nine-year-old husband that he had early-onset dementia.
"What would cause that?" I asked.
"Most likely Alzheimer's," the doctor said.
We didn't know much about Alzheimer's at the time, but I can tell you from personal experience that it is a devastating diagnosis.
There are no words to describe the heartbreak of knowing your loved one has an incurable brain disease that will rob him of his abilities, personality, memories, and eventually his life.
By 2050, without a cure for Alzheimer's, an estimated 16 million Americans can hear the same bleak diagnosis.
Age is the No.
1 risk factor for Alzheimer's and as the Baby Boomers age, more people will be at risk than ever.
NAPA does not guarantee a cure, but it is definitely a step in the right direction.
Alzheimer's has never received the attention of diseases like AIDS or cancer.
What good will it do to cure other diseases to find ourselves at a 50% chance of developing Alzheimer's once we reach 85 years old?
I don't know about you, but I hope to be able to recognize my children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren as long as I live.
Jim died in 2005 at fifty-nine years old after ten years with corticobasal degeneration, an Alzheimer's type of dementia.
Today would have been our 41st wedding anniversary had dementia not cut his life short.
I wrote my letter to the President because of Jim, and I'm sure  your loved ones are worth the few minutes it takes to go to www.alz.org and send a letter to the President in support of NAPA.
Copyright (c) December 2010, L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 14, 2010>
Winter hasn't officially begun and I'm already tired of the frigid weather.
Single digits and thirty-mile-an-hour winds make me want to burrow in and not make an appearance until springtime.
I started out bundled up in my winter coat and wearing a hat on a mission to finish my Christmas shopping.
After a few miserable trips from car to store, I purchased a heavy sweatshirt and put it on beneath my coat.
I pulled the hood up and spent the rest of the day with hair that was crushed to my head in places while static lifted the rest of it in wisps high above my head.
Not a good hair day!
Hair is not the biggest challenge on a cold, windy winter day.
The danger lies in being exposed to the elements for any length of time--especially without protective clothing.
Winter is especially dangerous when a family member has Alzheimer's.
A person with Alzheimer's may not remember to dress appropriately for the weather and a trip across the yard to check the mail could turn into a tragedy.
About 60% of those with Alzheimer's wander.
Wandering is especially dangerous in inclement weather when every minute counts.
Snow can change the look of the terrain and familiar surroundings may become unrecognizable to someone with dementia.
Slippery sidewalks and snow filled ditches become an obstacle course fraught with danger.
In the early stages, Jim walked our two big dogs every day.
One day, a neighbor became concerned about Jim when she saw him trudging through a deep snow walking the dogs.
He was wearing his winter coat, but had neglected to zip it up.
She met him at the end of her drive and convinced him to turn around and head toward home.
After Jim began to wander, I tried different types of safeguards.
I tried a device on the doorknobs that made them hard to open, but they didn't slow Jim down when he decided to open the door.
Eventually, I installed an alarm on the door so he couldn't go outside undetected.
I registered Jim with Safe Return which gave me some peace of mind.
When a person is lost, it is critical to find him within the first 24 hours to increase the chances of having a good outcome.
In cold winter weather, like we have now, the safety zone is further reduced.
Cold weather is dangerous for everyone, but when reasoning is impaired it is important for family members to be vigilant.
If your loved one must go outside, make sure he or she is dressed warmly and limit outdoor activities to short period of times.
Do not let a person with dementia go outside alone in inclement weather especially if they have been known to get lost.
Winter officially begins next week so we have plenty of time to experience the big chill.
Let's keep our loved ones warm and safe throughout the cold days ahead.
Copyright (c) December 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 6, 2010>
I found an Alzheimer's Weekly in my inbox that gave me hope that scientists may be on track to find effective treatment for the rare type of dementia Jim had.
While Jim was living, we didn't know exactly what disease he had, only that it was an Alzheimer's type of dementia.
Early on, the neurologist suspected Jim might have Pick's disease, or a disease that didn't even have a name.
When the autopsy report came in, I sent it to the neurologist to find out exactly what disease Jim had.
All I knew for sure after reading the report was that Jim had no evidence of Alzheimer's.
The neurologist called me back in a few minutes and gave me the name of a disease I had never heard of: corticobasal degeneration, sometimes called corticobasal ganglionic degeneration.
The 7th Annual International Conference on Frontotemporal Dementia focused on a disease that so rare it affects only about 20,000 people.
Frontotemporal Dementia Facts:  Accounts for 2 - 10% of dementia The onset is usually between 40 and 65 years of age The expected lifespan is 5-10 years Can run in families Familial FTD is linked to the "tau" gene, chromosome 17 The Frontotemporal Family of diseases affects behavior and causes problems with language.
Jim developed dementia at 49 years old and died at 59.
His personality changed and his behavior became childlike at time.
One of Jim's first symptoms was problems with language--spoken and written.
Jim could write letters and sometimes even have the correct letters in a word, but they might be jumbled.
I had him write a grocery list for me once and he wrote "taper powels." He later looked at the list and said, "Why did I write it like that?" He spoke in familiar phrases for a long time and was almost totally silent the last two years of his life.
The FTD diseases include: Pick's Disease Primary Progressive Aphasia Semantic Dementia Some doctors propose adding other diseases to the FTD classification and call the group Pick's Complex.
The diseases that may soon be included in FTD beneath the umbrella of Pick's Complex are corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy.
I've never understood why corticobasal degeneration was not included in the various Alzheimer's type of dementia.
Jim's diagnosis after the mental exam was "dementia of the Alzheimer's type." And corticobasal is definitely that.
One of the differences between FTD and Alzheimer's is that FTD usually begins with behavior and communication problems, where Alzheimer's begins with memory loss.
FTD Symptoms: Personality and behavior changes Lack of empathy and impaired social interactions Language difficulty Compulsive behavior and repetitive actions   As the disease progresses--impaired motor skills, speech, and movement Corticobasal degeneration is considered a movement disorder.
Late in the disease, Jim kept falling and used a device that looked much like a giant baby walker to keep him in an upright position.
He also had what is known as "alien limb" and didn't seem to know what to do with his right arm.
He clinched his right hand so hard for so long that he developed a pressure sore and had to have his little finger amputated.
People with FTD cannot stop or control their behavior--the frontal and temporal lobes are the first part of the brain to sustain damaged.
Since FTD is typically a younger onset dementia it is often mistaken for a mental disease rather than a degenerative brain disorder.
Out of control behavior, personality changes, and poor financial judgment are some of the symptoms that create strained relationships with loved ones.
Caregivers are only human and although logically we know our loved one is not deliberately being difficult, sometimes feelings are hurt, or the caregiver feels unappreciated, unloved, and becomes depressed.
My experience is that it is best to take one day at a time--or even one hour at a time.
I accepted Jim for the person he became, knowing that he would never again be the man he had been.
It helps to know that some of the behavior can be controlled with medication and from time-to-time you see a fleeting glimpse of a familiar expression, or a genuine smile.
I always cherished the moments when I said, "I love you" and Jim replied, "I love you too"--especially, when he said it like he meant it.
Copyright (c) December 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/ To read more about frontotemporal dementia: http://alzheimersweekly.com/content/frontotemporal-dementia-2010-roundup http://www.nia.nih.gov/NR/rdonlyres/97ABF1CB-8913-4877-B816-F35CAF126837/0/conv09n4.pdf
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 28, 2010>
This morning Pastor Jim talked about how God's light chases away the darkness, and as usual, his message gave me food for thought.
In a flash of light, the phrase came to my mind--the brighter the light, the deeper the shadows.
Our lives are made up of bright light and dark shadows.
Some mornings we awaken with joy in our hearts, confident the day will shine bright upon us.
Other days begin with a sense of something out of kilter, and as we orient ourselves to meet the day, a shadow may envelop us in gloom.
People surrounded by the brightest lights often plummet to the deepest shadows.
Do we expect more from those who live in the limelight?
Stars who flame the brightest fall from the sky and become lost in the shadows.
Often we are envious of famous people and believe they lead charmed lives.
Often it isn't until their deaths that we learn about their dark sides, the demons of drugs, insecurity, or physical abuse they hid behind their bright smiles.
Could we have seen the pain in their eyes if only we had looked closer?
Could we tell that Marilyn stood in the shadow of Norma Jean?
Could we have known that satisfying the public's insatiable curiosity about Princess Diana cast a shadow over her that contributed to her death?
When a loved one has Alzheimer's, we may spend many days living in the shadow of the life we used to have.
I recently talked to a woman whose husband has a type of dementia that drastically changed his personality.
For more than sixty years, their days were filled with travel, love, and laughter.
Now, he is making her life miserable.
He accuses her of cheating on him, calls her obscene names, says he hates her (and always has), that he wants a divorce, and on and on.
Her heart is broken.
She doesn't want to put him in a nursing home, and she worries about him constantly even during the time we spent drinking coffee at a local restaurant.
Now, his doctor is trying to control his rage with medication, but so far nothing has worked.
"I still love him," she said with tears in her eyes, "but I don't like him anymore." Her life has moved into deepest shadows.
The bright light that shone upon them seems like a distant memory, a lifetime ago, extinguished and vanished from her world.
If we can only remember that during the darkest times of our lives, the brightest light shines on us.
The light is always there.
It just happens to be shining at our backs while all we see is the shadow in front of us.
As we move forward, the shadow moves with us, and we think it will never go away.
During the most troubled times, we may be afraid that the shadow is a black hole and one more step will cause us to tumble into the abyss.
From time to time, we must turn around and look over our shoulder to see the bright light, still there, steadfast.
Without light, there are no shadows.
Do you remember making shadow puppets when you were younger?
You place your hand in front of a bright light and form your hand into a shape.
Your hand displaces the light, making a fun shadow on the wall.
If you make a solid fist, the light won't shine through your hand--you must actively make it happen.
The only way a shadow remains solid is if we do nothing to allow light to shine through.
The slivers of brilliant light blazing through the shadows reaffirms our faith that the deeper the shadows, the brighter the light.
Copyright (c) November 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 22, 2010>
I went to the Ozarks Writers League (OWL) Awards banquet hoping, but not expecting, to win an award for my contest entries.
After winning third place in the Gene Andereck short story contest, and third in the Dan Saults essay contest, I felt good about the recognition.
Sixty-six of OWL's 263 accomplished authors submitted more than 200 entries in nine categories, and though I was elated to win, I calmly walked forward to receive my checks and certificates.
One of the last awards was for the Book of the Year.
When President Delois called out my name and announced that Early Onset Blog: Essays from an Online Journal was the Best Book of the Year Award winner, I hopped and skipped toward the front to accept.
I bounded forward propelled by a mixture of excitement and the urge to get to the front of the room before they changed their minds.
The blog book didn't win Book of the Year because it has an outstanding plot or colorful fiction characters.
The characters are real people, with fear, anxiety, hope, and humor weaving us together as we share the bond of life with dementia.
My blog isn't flowery prose or a literary masterpiece.
Each idea, phrase, or observation comes from my heart or it doesn't hit the page.
For the past five years, I've wanted to write a memoir about Jim's life.
Although, I've never pared down my copious journal, I have shared many of my memories through the blog.
The blog has become a memoir of our ten-year journey through dementia.
Our story is the thread that binds the essays together that make up two books: Essays from an Online Journal and The Friendship Connection.
Now, the third book is almost finished.
The books are not bestsellers, and were never intended to be.
I give them to legislators during our Capitol Hill visits at the Advocacy Forum in Washington, DC.
I hand them out during Memory Day at the state capital.
Then, I distribute them free of charge at our Sedalia Memory Walk.
The worth of the books is not based on sales, and the rewards I receive are not monetary.
I am more like the old time vendors who receive something of value in exchange.
No, please don't send me a chicken or side of beef--my rewards are finding out I wrote something that helped or encouraged you.
I prefer emails, comments, or a hug when we meet in person.
Readers have many different views of bloggers and bloggers have different goals, or agendas.
My goals are simple: Encourage, Inspire, and Inform.
I know how alone a caregiver can feel, and I understand those middle-of-the-night moments when you need to be encouraged.
No matter how much family, friend, or church support you have, your inner strength occasionally needs to be shored up.
You need to be reminded that the days may be dark, but moments of joy will break through the clouds, and you will once again walk in sunshine.
I don't write this blog to win awards.
Yes, it is great to be recognized and it validates the time and effort to keep on writing even when I get no comments or emails.
I can look at the stats and know hundreds read the blog on a regular basis.
My writing comes from a passion of knowing how alone a caregiver can feel.
When I lose my passion, I'll close this blog down.
Until that day, if it ever comes, I'll keep on encouraging, inspiring, and informing.
Simple, but important goals, as long as Alzheimer's erases memories, erodes skills, and reduces our abundance of life.
___________ Early Onset Blog: Essays from an Online Journal and Early Onset Blog: The Friendship Connection are both available at http://www.amazon.com/ when you type in "Early Onset Blog."
Copyright (c) November 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 14, 2010>
My son saw the obituary before I did.
"Was that your friend with Alzheimer's in the obituaries today?" I hadn't read the paper yet but when he told me the name, I said "Yes, that was her."  The last time I saw Lynne, I didn't recognize her.
She bore small resemblance to the vivacious woman that had become my friend.
Yes, she had dementia when I met her; in fact, it was the reason I met her.
The Alzheimer's Association had started a group for early-onset Alzheimer's.
The group met in Columbia, and I had decided to take Jim.
Joetta from the Mid-Missouri Chapter asked me if I would mind bringing a lady with early onset that lived in Sedalia.
I agreed to go by and pick up Lynne so she could participate in the group.
From my journal--Meeting Lynne and becoming friends: The first group meeting was set.
I loaded Jim into the back seat of my Nissan Sentra and drove to the apartment building where Lynne lived.
She saw us drive up and immediately came outside.
Lynn was an attractive, quiet woman with a fair complexion, and neatly groomed.
We introduced ourselves, and she settled into the front seat for the hour long drive to support group.
We instantly hit it off.
As we drove toward Columbia, Lynne and I chatted easily about clothes, movies, and our dogs.
Lynne told me that she wished she had a man to be romantically involved with.
She said she really enjoyed male company, but had no one in her life now.
We stopped at the rest area so that everyone could use the restroom, and then headed onto our group meeting.
Other than Lynne, Jim, and I, one other couple attended the meeting.
They lived in Columbia, and Stan was in a much earlier stage of the disease than Jim.
Stan was articulate and he spoke about the frustration of not being able to do the things he used to do, the stigma of losing his job, and his fear of what the future held both him and his wife.
Jim's communication abilities were already severely impaired and he nodded agreement while the other man talked.
He mumbled "yes" several times.
The facilitator tried to draw Jim into the conversation.
"He said it," Jim finally stammered, tears running down his cheeks.
After we left the meeting, Lynne told me that she couldn't tell anything was wrong with the other participant.
I could hear a certain hesitation in Stan's speech when he talked, and noticed a dependence on his wife to help him when he became confused.
I took Lynne and Jim to lunch at Jim's favorite place, Steak and Shake.
Lynne wanted to buy our lunch, but I bought her lunch the first time.
She insisted her sister had given her money to buy lunch, so I agreed that she could pay next time.
The next month during the drive to the support group meeting, Lynn told me Jim scared her.
"Why?" I asked, because Jim was easy to get along with at this stage.
"It scares me to think I will be like that," she said.
Jim was sitting in the back seat wearing a jacket covered with pins, a cap pulled down low, dark sunglasses on, and earphones on so he could play his cassettes.
When the tapes clicked at the end, he handed it to me to change the tape.
Lynn changed them since I was driving.
"Lynne, every person is different.
The medicine seems to help you and it never helped Jim." "That makes me feel better," she said.
Each time I took her home, I gave her a hug.
I admired Lynn's awareness of her disease.
She willingly gave up her driver's license because she no longer trusted her driving.
She made the decision to go into assisted living when she could no longer remember if she had taken her medication.
"Alzheimer's is a terrible disease," Lynne said, "but in some ways it has been a real blessing.
I now have more friends than I ever had in my life, and I met these wonderful people because of my disease." Wow!
How do you respond when someone says something like that?
Lynne and I shared a love for movies and we went to several together.
We saw Anna and the King and we both enjoyed the movie and the beautiful costumes.
Now, Lynne is gone and a few lines in the paper mark her passing, but don't do justice to the warm, loving person she was.
Her journey has ended, but I will always remember the way her face lit up with the joy of life.
Copyright (c) November 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 7, 2010>
Sunday morning I awoke to a sound that catapulted me into a deja vu moment: Mario Karts.
The Super Nintendo belonged to Jim and Mario Karts was his favorite game to play.
My youngest son was sitting on the floor in front of the TV showing his three-year-old how to play.
"Put this game in, Daddy," my grandson said.
So Rob popped in a different Mario game.
While Rob played the game, my grandson was looking at the pictures on the other games.
"Oh, put the pirate game in!"  "That's actually Donkey Kong on a Pirate Ship." But Rob put it in and started it up.
Within a few minutes, that game was forgotten when another game pak caught my grandson's attention.
"Play Race Cars," was soon followed with, "Football!" My grandson happily pushed buttons on the football game and got all excited when he heard "First down!" It didn't matter if it was his team or the other, he felt like he was part of the game.
"These games are pretty primitive," Rob said.
Compared to the realistic new games, they are indeed.
Rob picked up Ms. Pac-Man and started it.
My seven-year-old granddaughter decided to play.
She quickly caught on and alternately ran from the ghosts until Ms. Pac-Man gobbled a power pack and then she chased them.
"The Christmas we got the Pac-Man game we stayed up all night playing it," I said.
"That was on the Atari," Rob said.
"It had a joy stick." I couldn't remember what the old players were called and Rob reminded me that our first player was an Odyssey.
"You played Pong on it by twisting dials," he said.
The video games were never my thing, but Jim and our sons played many spirited games.
They were competitive with each other and with their individual high scores.
My granddaughter became discouraged when she couldn't clear the Ms. Pac-Man screen.
"Try to beat your own score," Rob told her.
It was the smaller score to the left of the high score still recorded from long ago.
I don't know whether the score was Jim's or one of the kid's.
"I bet I could beat that high score in one game," Rob said.
Soon he had the first screen cleared and moved to the next level.
It wasn't long before a new high score replaced the old one.
What else could you expect from the son of the Game Master?
Jim played for many years after he developed dementia.
Some of the caregivers I hired to watch him while I worked played games with him.
Jim was still a formidable player.
Jim passed down his love of playing games to our sons, and they, in turn, passed it on to our grandchildren.
The game sounds brought back memories and I could feel Jim's presence and imagine his big smile and laughter at small hands on the same game controls he had held so many times.
Jim would have loved to see his son and grandchildren play the games he used to play.
This morning was a glimpse of what might have been but never was.
Just another example of how each day dawns a little differently, and each sun sets a little askew.
Copyright (c) November 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 3, 2010>
I like to eat out and looked forward to eating out in a really nice restaurant in Kansas City this past weekend.
It was Halloween and we were led to our seats by a soccer player.
The waitress, a biker babe, took my order for a pork chop smothered in cheese, mushrooms, and sauteed onions.
When the pork chop arrived, it looked and smelled delicious.
Then I cut into it and took a bite.
It didn't taste done and when I looked closer, I noticed the meat was pink.
It is rare for me to complain, but when the waitress checked back to see how everything tasted, I said, "My pork chop isn't done." "I'm sorry.
I'll get you another one," she said.
In about ten minutes, a man dressed as a referee brought me another pork chop.
"How does it look?" he asked.
Well, now, the other pork chop looked fine, but it wasn't done.
"Yeah," I said.
"It looks fine." "What didn't you like about the other pork chop?" he asked.
"It wasn't done," I said.
"It wasn't done?
They told us you said it was ugly." "Ugly?
I never said that." He laughed.
"Well I had never heard that one before, and we've been talking about it in the kitchen for the past ten minutes trying to figure out why the pork chop was ugly." We all had a good laugh.
I think he was relieved that I hadn't watched so many Food Network shows that I thought plating was the most important thing about the meal.
Later as I chuckled about the incident at the restaurant, I thought about some of the times Jim and I ate out and his dementia made it a challenge.
Jim liked to eat at certain restaurants, but he especially liked the food bar at Ryans.
It became more difficult for Jim to make his selections.
He would put gravy on his plate with the mashed potatoes on top.
Eventually, we began to order off the menu.
Jim loved steak, so I would order it for him.
He always wanted tea to drink and he would mix several packets of sweetener in, stir, turn the glass up and drink it without stopping.
The waitress would bring him another and he would repeat the process.
Jim usually drank about four glasses before the meal came.
He would give his steak a puzzled look.
He didn't seem to know what to do with the food.
After I cut up the steak, he would pick up his fork and eat it.
Jim liked to eat at Eddie's, a local drive-in turned diner.
It is a place with lots of tradition and classic food.
Jim's favorite was the chili.
One night we were leaving Eddie's and Jim casually picked up some change from a table.
"Hey, give that back," I said.
"That's her tip." "It's okay," the lady said.
"No, it's not," I replied and held out my hand for the change.
Jim scowled at me, but he handed it over.
The next time when we left Eddie's, I was helping him into the van when I noticed he had something clutched in his hand.
I pried it open to find the salt shaker.
I took it back in and found the table missing a shaker.
The waitress smiled and said, "Just when you think you have him figured out, he pulls something new, doesn't he?" That was an understatement.
It was always an adventure when we went out to eat.
Jim was unpredictable and sometimes I could sense people around us staring.
Outwardly, he looked like any other man in his fifties, but his behavior was on the eccentric side.
Jim didn't notice the stares, and I got to the point where I didn't care.
The thing about eating out--anything can happen.
The meal may be mediocre, or it may be delicious.
It may be Food Network fancy or it might be one ugly pork chop.
Copyright (c) November 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 26, 2010>
For a short delusional period this morning, I thought I had a day to just kick back and relax.
Then I remembered I was taking Mom to the hospital to see my brother.
So rather than drifting back into the dream I was having about going on a trip with an empty suitcase, I staggered to the kitchen to fix a pot of coffee.
I just can't pry my eyes open until I've had a cup of coffee.
When Jim and I were first married, I didn't drink coffee.
I thought the stuff was a bit on the bitter side and just didn't have any appeal for me.
I blame my coffee drinking habit on Jim's grandma.
Apparently, she thought everyone drank coffee and as soon as we walked into her house, she plunked a strong cup of coffee in front of me.
The conversation always went something like this: "Grandma, I don't drink coffee." "What?
You don't drink coffee?" The look on her face was priceless.
She would look at Jim and say, "She doesn't drink coffee?"  "No Grandma, she doesn't drink coffee." Then Jim would look at me and grin because he knew what was coming next.
"But, I've already poured it!" Like that was the final say.
There I would sit: cup of coffee in front of me, Grandma expecting me to drink it, and husband who thought it was funny.
So, I would take a small sip and try not to shudder.
First chance I got, I poured it down the sink.
When we went for the next visit, the scene played again.
Eventually, I just drank the cup of coffee treating it like a dose of medicine.
Get it down and get it over with, except, when she kept refilling my empty cup--then, I learned to make it last longer.
Now, I need no urging to drink coffee and feel downright deprived if I can't have a cup of Joe in the morning.
After coffee and a quick shower, I was dressed and out the door.
On the long drive to my mom's house, I roamed through the XM stations on my radio trying to find something she would like to hear.
I just knew she wouldn't appreciate the Classic Rock channel.
I came across enLighten and knew the gospel music would be a hit with her.
Listening to the sweet, almost angelic, harmony, I found myself thinking deep thoughts.
The kind of thoughts Jim and I used to share about life, death, and all the unexplained things that happen in between.
Of course, one of the first things I question is why did Jim develop dementia and why did his life end at the age I am now.
I wonder why my brother keeps having strokes.
It seems that if I think things can't get any worse, they can and sometimes do.
My brother already lives in a nursing home and can't walk, has constant pain, endless headaches, and basically a pretty miserable existence.
He is in the hospital because of more strokes.
His speech is slurred and hard to understand.
He has trouble swallowing and has to be on thickened liquids and mechanically softened foods.
When Mom and I walk into his room, we find Donnie twisted to one side of his bed.
He asks us to straighten him up.
I push and Mom tugs and we get him in a more comfortable position.
After Food Service brings his lunch tray, the nurse wants to move him into a more upright position in the bed.
She calls an aide to help her.
"She can help you," Donnie tells the nurse pointing in my direction.
"Can you?" she asks.
Of course, I can.
After all the time Jim spent in the nursing home, I learned how to do everything to make him more comfortable.
On the way to Mom's house, the hospital called to tell her Donnie had been released.
He has to return in about a month for surgery, but for now, he is headed home.
After I dropped Mom off, I did more deep thinking to the backdrop of gospel music.
The trip home seemed faster than the trip down.
When I reached Sedalia, I stopped by McDonald's for a cup of Joe--only I got a Mocha Frappe.
I can only imagine what Grandma Fisher would think of such a sissy version of coffee.
I don't think Jim would be impressed either--he liked his coffee steaming hot and black.
He would appreciate the gospel music, I'm sure, and he would have enjoyed the long drive on a beautiful October day.
Copyright (c) October 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 19, 2010>
Sunday morning my seven-year-old granddaughter sat beside me drawing pictures.
She labeled the pictures "Cartoon Network" and told me the girl with pigtails was her.
"Daddy doesn't know what life is all about," she told me as she put the finishing touches on the picture.
I almost choked on my coffee at her solemn tone.
I finally managed a strangled, "Oh?
How's that?" "He thinks life is about winning," she said, "and it's not.
Life can be about losing." When she said that, I laughed.
Rob had warned me about the trophy generation who expect trophies for participating.
Kids that don't want to win, they just want to tie.
Winning might upset someone who didn't win--or (heaven forbid) might feel like a loser.
I've always considered winning to be important.
Not winning at all costs by any means--but winning fair and square.
I never liked to play on a team with someone who didn't put out their best effort because of an "it's just a game" philosophy.
Competitiveness is an inner urging to do our best whether we are playing a game, facing a tough challenge, or pulling our share of the weight, or more, at work.
Coming out in first place is an accomplishment and cause for celebration.
Sometimes, the will to win can be the difference between life and death.
We have all heard stories about people who refused to die and survived against insurmountable odds because they were determined to win.
"Grandma Linda, I'm serious.
If you have the prizewinning pumpkin you can't make pumpkin pie out of it.
The losers get to eat pumpkin pie." I had to admit there was some logic to her theory.
"Where did you learn what life is all about?" I asked, curiosity getting the best of me.
"The Berenstain Bears," she said.
Who am I to dispute the Berenstain Bears?
Since I often ponder what life is all about while driving to and fro from my various commitments, I thought about the validity of how life can be about losing.
Anyone who is a caregiver for a loved one with dementia understands losing.
We lose our loved ones one skill, one memory, at a time.
Day after day we grapple with this situation life has thrust upon us.
When Jim developed dementia, I learned about losing the man I had married, first to the disease and eventually to death.
Up until then, life had been difficult at times, but Jim had been my strength and the person who propped me up when I was sad, or just felt like a loser.
Losing Jim made me a much stronger person.
I had to make the tough decisions and with no one to pass them on to, I understood Harry Truman's motto that the "buck stops here." So thinking back to a seven-year-old's statement that life can be about losing, I have to admit that sometimes it is.
Losing shapes our character and the fabric of our being in a different way than winning does.
We find inner strength that makes us appreciate when life is good.
And my final thought on the matter--pumpkin pie isn't the only thing we would miss in life if we don't take a chance on losing.
Copyright (c) October 2010 by L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 9, 2010>
My granddaughter's last home volleyball game was Thursday night.
Somehow I had never seen the volleyball schedule and had missed every game so far.
I looked at my calendar and sighed.
"I have an SBW meeting Thursday," I told my son, Eric, when he called to tell me about the game.
The games started at 5:30 in a nearby town, but I don't get off work until 6:00.
Still, I had intended to take some vacation to go to some of the home games.
"Well, maybe you can go to her tournament.
That will be either next Saturday or the next one, I'm not sure which," Eric said.
I didn't have to look at my calendar to know that it didn't matter which Saturday--both were booked solid.
"I'll just take off work early and be a little late to my meeting," I said.
Before I left work, I gave Brenda (co-worker and SBW member) the money to pay for my dinner.
She said she would save me a place.
"Ask them to serve my meal and if I'm late, I'll just eat it cold." I figured that if necessary I could leave before the game ended and be only fifteen minutes late.
I arrived at the gymnasium just as the "B" Team was finishing up their game.
I found Eric, Shawna, and Shawna's mom and dad sitting on the bleachers.
Soon the "A" Team finished their warm up and the game was on.
I played on the volleyball team when I was in school and on both a women's recreational team and a co-ed team with Jim when I was younger.
I settled in to watch the game confident that at least this was a game I understood.
A girl served the ball and it went out of bounds.
The scoreboard chalked up a point for the other team.
I thought my eyes were playing tricks on me.
Then, a girl on our team served the ball and the other team returned it, our girls dropped it, so score another point for the visiting team.
"I don't understand why they are getting points," I said to Shawna.
"Only the team serving can make points." "Either team can score regardless of who serves," she said.
"Yeah, they've changed the rules since we were in school," said Shawna's mom, Wanda.
"At first I was really confused." My granddaughter was her team's best server.
She scored five quick points just by tossing the ball in the air and slamming it over.
"We couldn't serve overhand in school," I said.
As I watched the game, I realized the changes made it a much faster paced game.
I suppose that's much more suited to today's faster paced world.
On my way to my meeting, I pondered on how many rules have changed over the years.
When I was young and dressed up, the only question was whether to wear short or long white gloves.
Shoes were generally black or white and you didn't wear the white ones after Labor Day or before Easter.
Everyone dressed up for church, and you wouldn't have dreamed of wearing your blue jeans or shorts and sneakers.
Girls wore dresses to school--it was in the rules.
Some of the rules of life have changed.
I heard on the news that for the first time in America, more couples live together without tying the knot than couples who are married.
How could such a thing happen?
Just to mention a few reasons: people marry later in life, divorce can be financially devastating, there is little to no stigma attached to having children when the parents aren't married.
Sometimes when a loved one has a serious illness, like Alzheimer's, couples divorce to be able to afford nursing home care.
Rule changes affect everything and everyone around us and can be either good or bad.
Changes are bad when it makes things easier, but not better.
Rule changes are good if they make the mundane or outdated fresh and new.
They may be good if the only good reason for keeping a rule is "that's the way it's always been done."  When I walked into my meeting every woman in the room faced the flag with her hand over her heart.
I stopped inside the doorway and joined them to recite the same Pledge of Allegiance I had learned in elementary school.
There is no doubt that some rules are better left alone.
Copyright (c) 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset@hotmail.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 5, 2010>
I walked into church Sunday and heard someone call out "Hey, girlfriend!" Looking around, I spotted a woman from last Wednesday's "Girlfriends Guide to Christian Living" class.
Her greeting made me smile with the memory of the evening spent with a new group of girlfriends of all ages.
Last Wednesday, we listed the qualities of a girlfriend.
The leader, Jo Perusich, wrote them on a whiteboard.
The women called out: Honesty, Loyalty, Steadfastness, Can keep a secret, and Bathroom Buddy.
"Bathroom Buddy.
I love it!" Jo said.
"Yes," said the youngest member of the group, Bethany.
"When you go to the bathroom, she gets up without you asking so you don't have to walk across the room by yourself." Jo asked us several thought-provoking questions and we were to write the name of a friend and the incident.
When we finished, she asked what we had discovered.
"I was surprised that I thought of certain people as friends," said one woman.
"I noticed the same name came up several time in different roles," said another.
The homework assignment was to connect with a girlfriend and tell her that you considered her a blessing, a gift of God, and how much you value the friendship.
I thought about this and had an old friend in mind.
Sunday morning, I sat beside Sheila, the Memory Walk Coordinator, and shared the news that our walk total was now more than $18,000.
After the services, she and I talked all the way to the lobby where we parted.
We hugged each other, and suddenly I knew who I needed to share the message with.
I took her hands, looked her in the eye, and told her that she was a real blessing in my life.
She got tears in her eyes and said, "You don't know how much that means to me." I am so thankful that Jo challenged us to put into words how precious friends are to us and how much our lives are enriched through giving and receiving the love of friends.
When Jim developed dementia, I lost my best friend in the world.
He was the person who always had my back, was always on my side, no matter how misguided I might be.
Strangely enough, it was because of Jim's dementia that my circle of friendship grew.
First, I became closer to my other female family members as they pitched in to help me.
I became close friends with women I met through my Alzheimer's volunteer work including three women I met in Washington DC.
We called ourselves the four musketeers.
My connection with these women--Jane from New York, Sarah from Virginia, and Kathy from Maryland--would never have happened if I hadn't gone to the Alzheimer's Advocacy Forum.
The friendship circle grows through my involvement in writers groups, in my business women's group, and through work and work-related conferences.
We have limitless opportunities to grow our relationships with friends.
With each new friendship we open up our hearts to the blessing of giving and receiving.
In this busy, busy world we may not have as much time for friends as we would like.
It is amazing how much a lagging spirit can be rejuvenated by squeezing an hour from our schedules to spend quality time with close friends.
copyright (c) October 2010 L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 28, 2010>
Recently, my three-year-old grandson crammed a crayon up his nose and a specialist had to extract it.
When my son told me about the incident, I said, "Kind of reminds me of the time I lost the pencil eraser in my ear." "Was that you?
I thought it was one of your brothers," he said.
I recall that experience vividly, considering I was only a second grader.
My ear itched, and I used the eraser end of my pencil to scratch it.
I noticed the eraser had fallen out of the pencil and looked all around my desk for it.
When I couldn't find it, I just assumed it had rolled out of sight.
A week or so later, I developed a terrible earache.
Mom took me to our family doctor in Stover.
Dr. Hoffa sat me on a table and pointed a bright light at my ear.
"Wow, that light is shining right through your ears and onto the wall," he said.
I might have been only seven, but that didn't seem right to me.
"No it isn't," I said.
I did roll my eyes around trying to see if the light really was shining through.
The doctor stuck some high-tech instrument into my ear, tweezers, I'm pretty sure.
Then, he showed me the little pink eraser off my yellow No.
2 pencil.
"You knew that light wouldn't shine through because the hole was plugged up with this." he said.
"I wondered what happened to my eraser," I said.
"Why didn't you tell me you had an eraser in your ear?" my mom asked.
"I didn't know it was there!" I said.
The doctor gave me a sucker and sent me on my way.
Dr. Hoffa was the only doctor I saw until I married and moved away.
He eventually retired and developed Alzheimer's before his death.
When Jim and I were newlyweds, our family doctor was Dr. Kirby who retired many years ago.
When a family doctor retires, patients scramble to find another doctor.
It's discouraging when you make call after call to hear, "We aren't taking new patients." You keep asking yourself questions: Will I have to resort to finding a specialist for each medical problem I have?
How will I find a good cold and flu specialist?
Is the emergency room going to be my primary physician?
A 2008 University of Missouri (MU) study predicts a 44,000 shortfall of family doctors by 2025.
Jack Colwill, professor emeritus of family and community medicine at MU School of Medicine, attributes the shortage to retiring baby boomer doctors being replaced by younger doctors who specialize rather than go into general practice.
Given how difficult it has always been to find a family doctor, this is not a huge surprise to many of us.
We have become a more mobile society and if we aren't moving from place to place, our doctors are.
Either way, it's up to us to find a doctor that fits our needs.
Rural areas will be particularly hard hit.
Programs are in place to encourage medical students to become general practitioners in rural areas.
MU has programs to place students in rural hospitals for their residencies and pre-admits students each year from rural areas.
The students admitted under these programs are more likely to practice family medicine in a rural setting.
Family doctors know who you are when they see you.
Your family doctor knows your family history, as well as your medical history.
When Jim began to develop dementia, our family doctor knew Jim's forgetfulness was not normal for him.
There may not be too many old-fashioned general practitioners like Dr. Hoffa, but as long as kids have No.
2 pencils, we need family doctors.
Copyright (c) September 2010, L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 20, 2010>
The Sedalia Memory Walk was Saturday and the sea of purple shirts showed our community support for loved ones with Alzheimer's.
Our Memory Walk was fun with a cake walk, Don the Balloon Man, refreshments, door prizes, raffle items, and dance routines by the young ladies from Center Stage Academy.
Smiles and hugs made the rounds as we connected with others who had walked a mile in similar shoes, helping lighten each other's load for the journeys we shared.
"Do you remember me?" a lady asked.
"I worked at Four Seasons Living Center when Jim was there." Jim was at Four Seasons four years and although her face looked familiar, I couldn't come up with her name.
"I'm Pat," she said.
"My husband wound up in the same room Jim had in the Alzheimer's unit."  "I remember you were having problems with your husband.
I'm sorry to hear he had Alzheimer's."  "Yeah," Pat said, "one day the staff found him standing on top of the sink." I had to laugh about that one.
"Well, Jim did a lot of things, but he never did that!"  "You know, you just have to remember the funny things that happened," she said.
I agreed.
It is much better to remember the times we smiled than to think about the distressing times.
Just before we began the walk, our master of ceremonies, Terry Kelley, sang "The Dance," and I walked up to take a picture of him.
The song was so touching, I gave Terry a hug.
The tears started flowing because the words of that song are so true for me and for millions of caregivers.
My cousin Reta had taken a picture too, and she pulled me into a big bear hug.
Connie Pope from Fair View hugged me too and said, "Are you all right."  I think through the boo-hooing I let her know I was.
"It's that song," I said.
Connie said, "Look around, Linda.
See all these people here today?
They wouldn't be here if it hadn't been for you and Jim.
You are the one that started this whole thing." I may have started it, but Fair View has been at every Memory Walk since the first one I coordinated in 1999.
The teams were introduced, then Memory Walk Coordinator Sheila Ream and I carried the Memory Walk banner and led our walkers down Memory Lane toward the fairgrounds.
Sheila handed off the banner to her son Phillip who has helped us throughout the year.
As we rounded the corner and saw the long line of walkers behind us, Phillip said, "I've looked forward to this all year." While the prizes were being announced, we handed out purple and white balloons for the balloon release.
We used a marker to write our loved one's names on the balloons.
I put Jim's name in a heart and wrote "To heaven with love." I tied the balloon onto a basket handle, and while I signed a book, Jim's balloon broke away and raced toward the sky.
That afternoon, after a leisurely soak in the bathtub, I put on PJs and settled in for the rest of the day.
I got to spend the evening with my two youngest grandkids.
My three-year-old grandson played with his race cars, and shouted, "Start your engines!" Before when he played, he called his driver Josh, after a relative he has seen race, but after the Memory Walk, he said the driver was Jim.
As our grandson played with his cars, I couldn't help but think how much Jim enjoyed his grandkids.
Jim never got to meet the three-year-old that often talks about "Grandpa Jim" and even pictures his grandpa as the tiny driver in his racing game.
Jim and I parented two wonderful sons.
Our four fantastic grandchildren bring so much joy to my life.
When I look at my sons and my grandkids, I know it is best that I never knew the heartbreak early onset dementia would bring to our family.
I've been blessed with love, and the pain diminishes when compared to the dance that forever lives in my memories.
Copyright (c) September 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 12, 2010>
I've always had a love affair with the color purple which worked well when I discovered it was the Alzheimer's color.
We are gearing up for Memory Walk so I've gotten into the spirit by painting my fingernails and toenails purple.
Not just any purple--Xtreme Wear Deep Purple.
I dressed for church today in my "Walk to End Alzheimer's" shirt and topped, or bottomed, it all off with my brand new purple high-heeled Crocs I bought at the Crocs Outlet in Branson.
It so happened that the air conditioning was broken so we shopped in heat more Xtreme than my nail polish.
Perhaps, my brain was overheated when I fell in love with the purple shoes, or so my granddaughter seemed to think.
She said the shoes were a little weird, but Crocs are comfortable shoes with cushiony padding underfoot that's a lot like walking around with a Memory Foam pillow tied to the bottom of your feet.
At church this morning during the "greet those around you" moment, the lady sitting behind me said she loved my shirt.
On the way out the door, another lady admired my shoes.
"My granddaughter thought they were a little strange," I admitted.
"They are such a fun color!" she said.
I had to agree--but then they are purple slippers so gotta love 'em, right?
"They're comfortable too," I added.
Getting into the purple zone is more than wearing the appropriate clothing and accessories.
It is a time to fundraise and get out the word about the Memory Walk.
On Labor Day, Jim's Team raised $1,150 at our traffic stop.
Saturday some of us stood in front of Walmart handing out "Save the Date" cards and forget-me-not seed packets with the tiny sheets of paper stapled to it with walk information and contact numbers.
We had a collection bucket available for donations, but our main purpose was to create awareness about the Alzheimer's Memory Walk.
The Walk Committee has a busy week ahead.
We plan to gather door prizes and last minute items.
We will make a lot of last minute preparations so that everything goes smoothly on Saturday, September 18.
I'm trying not to panic because my books haven't come in.
Part of my sponsorship is signing and distributing Early Onset Blog: The Friendship Connection.
The turnaround is usually a few days on book orders, but as of the last time I checked they were still "in production." A lot of work and planning goes into the Memory Walk and that cuts down on the chances of things going too wrong.
Rain or shine, I know one thing for certain--a lot of people will be up early Saturday morning and head to the Fairgrounds for Memory Walk.
Purple will be the color of the day when we grab up the banner and walk to end Alzheimer's.
Copyright (c) Sept. 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 5, 2010>
My mom and I recently entered a restaurant and while we stood behind the "Please Wait to Be Seated" sign, the hostess walked rapidly toward us, not letting her unusual gait slow her down.
She approached us with a large, friendly smile that made her face glow.
"Two?" she asked.
"How are you, today?" She struggled with the sentence.
"Fine," I replied, "and how are you?""Busy!" she said, with that big smile that made you realize she wanted it that way.
She was definitely busy, and as we ate our lunch, we watched her lead a steady stream of hungry people to their tables.
She had found her niche.
A job she was good at and took pride in doing well.
It is encouraging to see people working despite an obvious handicap.
Many of us work because we have to, or as a woman I used to work with always said, "I've developed this really bad habit--I like to eat." With the Labor Day holiday, I couldn't help but think about the 500,000 people with early onset dementia and how hard going to work each day can be for them.
As dementia progresses, it erodes their self confidence as they struggle through the workday.
Even getting to work can be a challenge once confusion sets in.
Unlike our hostess who had a lifetime to adapt to her challenges, people with early onset dementia find themselves in the frustrating position of losing skills that may have taken them to the top of their field.
They may have skills and talents that identify their very personhood.Jim dropped out of high school when he was fifteen years old.
I once asked him how that was possible and he explained that his family followed the crops to find work.
"We moved to a different state and I never enrolled in school again." Jim was a high school dropout, but he was an intelligent person.
Later he would get his GED, but his forte was working with his hands.
Jim never needed instructions to take apart and repair anything mechanical.
Early in the disease when Jim was home alone while I worked, I never knew what he was going to try to "fix" during the day.
One night I came home to find our VCR was completely taken apart and scattered all over the living room floor.
People with early onset dementia sometimes hide the diagnosis from their coworkers and bosses to remain in the workforce until the disease progresses to the point they cannot continue.
Alzheimer's is a slow process and depending on the proper regimen, it is not always necessary for a person to quit work immediately.
It depends on the job and how accommodating the employer is.
Perhaps a job can be simplified, or a person can be shifted to a less demanding position.
Each family struggles with what is best for the person with dementia.
He may stubbornly refuse to admit he cannot do his job safely.
I talked to a woman whose husband was a heavy equipment operator.
He was the boss of his family business and was still working although his dementia was advanced.
His son worked with him and knew that Dad was jeopardizing their business reputation and endangering both their lives on a daily basis.Losing a long-term job can be emotionally and financially devastating for a family.
When a loved one has dementia, the caregiver may have to quit work too.
Early onset dementia takes a toll on every member of the family.During the Labor Day celebration, take time to pause and think about all the people unemployed because of Alzheimer's--those with the disease and those who care for them.
It might make Tuesday morning seem a little brighter if you are fortunate enough to have a job.
When someone asks how you are, you might reply "busy" and smile about it.Copyright (c) September 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 25, 2010>
I began this day of vacation at 4:30 a.m. to meet and greet the four Missouri researchers who will cycle 71 miles from Sedalia to Jefferson City.
Jon Cirrito, PhD, and Jessica Restivo, are researchers from Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis.
Joining them were Ben Timson, PhD, Professor of Biomedical Sciences at MU and David Oliver, PhD, Assistant Director of MU Interdisciplinary Center on Aging and Board President of the Alzheimer's Association Mid-Missouri Chapter.
The four researchers and the support team stayed the night at Comfort Inn in Sedalia, and I wanted to catch up with them before they left town.
I had a cup of coffee while they ate fruit, drank juice, and prepared for the ride.
I know David Oliver and he introduced me to the other members of the team.
Dr. Jon Cirrito showed me a Google map of the route.
They would be passing through some small towns that not many other than locals have visited.
The bicyclists will go through Clifton City ("not a city," I informed them), Prairie Home, and Jamestown before arriving in Jefferson City.
They have three scheduled rest stops along the way and have no time limit other than to reach their final destination before dark.
"Some of the other groups have hit really bad weather in other states," Dr. Oliver said as he applied generous amounts of sunscreen to his face and arms.
"We credit this beautiful 60 degree weather to collective prayer." Dr. Oliver, 68, was the oldest in this group of cyclists.
He said cyclists had to sign a release and list the medicines they took.
"My list was long," he said.
"I have a stent, poor knees, and lousy hearing, but I am functional and know I can ride this bike 71 miles for this worthwhile cause.
I'm looking forward to it."We walked outside where the four cyclists each filled two bottles--one with water and the other with Gatorade.
Finally, the bicycles were loaded onto the two support vehicles, and we headed across town to Hubbard Park.The bicycles were unloaded, and Jessica decided she needed long sleeves and pulled a long-sleeved T-shirt over her official Alzheimer's Breakthrough Ride shirt.
They climbed on their bikes and fastened their helmets.
Dr. Cirrito took the lead on his bicycle equipped with a GPS.It was exciting to see this group of researchers be part of a nationwide effort to make Alzheimer's disease a national priority.
The Ride began in San Francisco on July 17 and will end in Washington DC on World Alzheimer's Day, September 21.
More than 55 researchers have been collecting signatures to present to Congress urging them to make Alzheimer's disease a national priority.
The original goal to obtain 50,000 signatures has been doubled to 100,000.Approximately 110,000 Missourians have Alzheimer's disease.
An estimated 5.3 million Americans have Alzheimer's and as the baby boomers age, the number is expected to swell to as many as 16 million by 2050.Dr.
Oliver explains that research funding is dismal especially considering the toll on individuals, families, and others.
"I believe current research spending is around $375 million.
We are riding to encourage Congress to push this to $2 Billion and make AD a major priority like other killer and devastating diseases."The side of the "pony" (as the truck is called) says, "The toughest hill to climb is Capitol Hill." Even with the winding, hilly blacktop ahead of them, I'm sure Jessica, Jon, Ben, and David wholeheartedly agree.Follow the progress of Alzheimer's Breakthrough Ride at http://www.alz.org/.
While you're there, sign the petition.Copyright (c) L. S. Fisher August 2010http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 24, 2010>
Thursday night we began to finalize plans for our September Memory Walk.
Months of leg work, calls, and personal contact have led up to the big date less than a month away.
Our catch phrase this year is "It all just falls into place." At least that's the way it seems to people who show up on walk day to find that helping hands have joined together to make sure the event runs smoothly.A Memory Walk is a big undertaking and without community Champions, it would never happen.
Champions are the teams like Fair View that have participated since the first walk I organized in 1999.
They have been part of every walk, every event that the Memory Walk committee has hosted.
Not satisfied with doing a little, they do a lot.
They fundraise all year, and consistently support us with thousands of dollars.
This year, they took another step and became a corporate sponsor.It warms your heart to know that even in these tough economic times, people continue to support our local chapter.
One of our longtime sponsors is Ken Weymuth at W-K.
I was having an oopsie fixed on my new car when I asked if Ken was in the office.
I had dropped off a corporate sponsor packet a few months back and had never had a chance to follow up on it.
I walked into his office and asked him if he would be a sponsor and he asked, "What will it cost me?" A few minutes later I walked out check in hand.The Sedalia Democrat has been our advertising sponsor for more than ten years.
I have worked with three different publishers.
The current publisher, Dave Phillips paired us up with Erin Livengood who takes the time to produce professional ads.Third National Bank and Central Missouri Electric hold perfect corporate sponsor records.
Septagon came onboard during the years Shelley Spinner coordinated the walk.
That was also the time we started printing the shirts locally and Main Street Logo pitched in to do that for us.The list goes on and on--the sweet ladies who give $5 to sponsor a walker, companies that donate food, drink, and door prizes, the host of volunteers that turn up to set up tables or dole out T-shirts, and let us not forget Don the Balloon Man who twists balloons into colorful hats.We have a walk with ordinary people--sorry, none of us are celebrities.
But more celebrities are supporting the Alzheimer's Association and one of them decided to hold a "March" rather than a walk.
Maria Shriver, California's First Lady has organized a 5K March and candlelight vigil.
Several celebrities have already committed to joining in the March--Rob Lowe, Leeza Gibbons, and Jane Fonda--to mention a few.
Celebrities can make a powerful impact, but that doesn't replace the efforts needed by everyday people who have spent time in the trenches caring for a loved one with Alzheimer's.
It doesn't replace the hugs of support and encouragement for caregivers to help them make it through difficult days, or smiles to lift their spirits when they are overwhelmed with responsibility.Think about what you can do to make it "fall into place." It takes all of us who know what it's like to make the effort to bring Alzheimer's awareness to our local area so that it might expand to the national arena and onward to a global movement.
So whether we march or walk, it is important that we do everything we can to call attention to the alarming escalation of dementia as the baby boomers age.
The only way to move forward is one step at a time.Copyright (c) August 2010 L.S.
Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 16, 2010>
My mom stayed all night with me Saturday night.
I was trying to remember the last time she spent the night at my house and finally decided it was when Jim was still at home but needed supervision at all times.
I could not get professional help for more than about six hours a day, three days a week.
That left a lot of gaps during my forty-hour workweek.
My mom would pack a bag and drive for an hour to fill out the weekly schedule.
She would arrive before the day help had left and stayed with us a couple nights each week.
I know my brothers and sisters agree with me that we are fortunate to have a mother who is in such good health although she is in her eighties.
Mom is fun-loving and still likes to play her guitar and pal around with her sister-in-law, Lebetta.
When my mom came up Saturday to spend the night, we didn't have anything we had to do, so we visited and spent some quality time together.
It wasn't until after we spent the afternoon and evening together that I realized how much I missed having that much time with her.
It's a sad commentary on how hectic I've let life become that I have so little time to visit with my own mother.My mom and I have a lot to talk and laugh about.
Sometimes the conversation turned serious as we talked about dreams we have about loved ones who were once a major part of our lives.
Mom talked about her dreams of dad.
"He is usually about thirty-five in my dreams," she said.
"He's always young and healthy.""Jim never has dementia in my dreams," I said.
"I dream about Mommy and Poppy," she said, meaning her parents.
"You know, Lebetta and I were talking the other night about how we know more people that have died than are alive." I can't imagine the hole left in a person's life when they have outlived all their siblings.
My mom came from a big family and she is the only one living.
Her parents, sister, and brothers are all gone.I think about my cousins on Mom's side of the family.
How they've each lost at least one parent, and many of them have lost both.
My dad died in 1990 at 67 years old.
That is not much older than I am now.
My mom has soldiered on through two serious relationships that have both ended.
It is a good thing that she is a strong woman.
She checks on my brother Donnie almost every day.
She's moved to town to be near the long-term care facility where he lives.
My brothers and sisters who live nearby, provide the kind of relief for Mom that she did for me when Jim was the one that needed looking after.In many families, relatives feud with each other and every family gathering is tension filled, because no one can keep track of which family members are not speaking to each other or whose feelings are hurt.
Our family has always been blessed with a healthy dose of minding your own business.
We are supportive of each other, but none of us try to tell a brother or sister how to live his or her life.
Nope, we just live and let live.
It may not work for every family, but it certainly works for ours.
Each of us is a leaf on our family tree and, like a leaf, we can't just hop from our tree to another because we don't like the limb God attached us to.
It is always much better to get along with the other leaves on the same branch.
While I was gone this evening, Mom called and left a message on my answering machine.
She just wanted me to know that she really enjoyed our visit.
It was too late by the time I got home to call her back, but I have to say a resounding, "Me too!" I'm thinking that having my mom stay the night is something I need to do more often.
Maybe next time she can bring her guitar.
Jim would be pleased if guitar music once again drifted through the rooms of the house he built.Copyright (c) August 2010, L.S.
Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 8, 2010>
When Jim developed dementia, I thought it would be a good activity for us to put jigsaw puzzles together.
I set up a table and we worked on a 750 piece puzzle.
Jim always felt good when he could fit a piece into the puzzle.
Sometimes, he bent pieces trying to force them into places where they "almost" fit.I went to a Business Women of Missouri conference this weekend and was particularly impressed with speaker Mary Gage's comparison of life to a jigsaw puzzle.
She gave some blog-worthy information in her motivating session.
One of the things she talked about that I thought was relevant to my life was how sometimes a piece don't seem to fit, and we just have to lay it aside and put it in later when we find where it belongs.
She asked if anyone ever tried to put a puzzle together without looking at the picture.
Not a single hand was raised.
No, we all want to know what the picture looks like before we start putting the pieces together.
Besides, if we are honest, it makes it a whole lot easier.
We don't waste time trying to place a piece of grass at the top of the puzzle when we know from the picture that it goes at the bottom.As with many conferences, my "ah-ha" moment didn't come from the speaker, but rather from a stranger sitting across the table from me.
We had a puzzle on our table, and as a group, we were asked to put the puzzle together.
Well, it wasn't a jigsaw puzzle, or I'd still be sitting at that table trying to do my part.
It was one of those children's puzzles with probably less than 30 pieces in it.
We chatted while we put the puzzle together, and the woman said she was a "puzzle person" and that one time she had planned an exercise with puzzles.
She had taken two puzzles with the same picture and mixed them together.
The idea was that the pieces would be interchangeable and make two puzzles when they were done.
I'm not sure what the point of the exercise was, but she learned that just because two puzzles have the same picture, doesn't mean the pieces are interchangeable.
What she discovered was that the pictures were identical on the boxes, but pieces were shaped differently.So where is my "ah-ha" moment in this story?
People with Alzheimer's have the same picture on the outside that they had before they developed the disease, but they are trying to fit pieces from a different puzzle into their life's picture.
It's like they've been handed a different box of puzzle pieces to fit into the puzzle they already have.
The pieces no longer fall into place, and even if you put one aside, you won't find a place for it later.We all know from past experience, that unless the pieces are a perfect fit, you can't force them into place.
A misfit piece leaves a gap, and you know immediately it won't work.
Occasionally, you will find a piece of a puzzle that seems to fit, but it may stand out from the surrounding pieces because it is the wrong color and doesn't complete the picture.
While Jim and I worked on our puzzles, he would sometimes pick up a piece and walk away with it in his hand.
He would lay the pieces down in out of the way spots and sometimes I couldn't find them.
In the completed puzzle all the pieces we had fit neatly together, but sometimes as many as five pieces were missing.We know where we want our lives to go, and we plug away at the pieces until we find where they belong.
But isn't our personal life's big picture fuzzy and not a finished image?
I believe that our pictures change and our puzzle pieces are constantly adapting to the uncertainty.When a person has Alzheimer's, he struggles every day to fill in missing pieces of this puzzle called life.
By being supportive, you might help your loved one find some of the misplaced pieces and fit them where they belong.
Copyright (c)  August 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 2, 2010>
I turned the calendar this morning and found it hard to believe it is already August.
Before this month is over, kids will be back in school, and we'll all be wondering what happened to the summer and all the plans we made in the springtime.When I was in elementary school, it seemed to me that summer lasted for a long time.
The first day of school some kids had changed so much over the vacation we might not recognize them at first glance.
Now that we are adults, we don't usually see drastic changes over three months' time.
It's hard to notice a few more "laugh lines" or that the sun is glinting off more gray hair than the last time we saw someone.
And unless you are in the educational field, you most likely see your co-workers nearly every day and don't have much occasion to be shocked by a change that happened while you weren't looking.August is State Fair month.
It is usually extremely hot or stormy.
What is it about the State Fair that brings out the worst in the weather?
Is it because all us wimps are used to air conditioning and suddenly find ourselves in the great outdoors--walking around on hot pavement--without any shade.
What's not to love about that?
It seems like time goes by faster than it ever did.
Not only is summer almost gone, but with surprising speed we'll be into 2011.
Here we are ten years into the twenty-first century and I still sometimes want to put "19" in front of the year.
August was once a time of birthday celebrations.
Jim would have been 65 years old later this month.
He lost the battle with dementia more than five years ago--and never made it to his 60th birthday.
At one time, in my youth, I'm sure I thought anyone in his or her 60s was ancient.
Now, it doesn't seem old at all.
I have three older siblings who are in their 60s, and I'm getting pretty darn close to it myself.
I have a little time left, but as fast as time goes by, we're going to have to call the fire department before anyone lights the candles.Growing older is like anything else--there is good and bad.
On the plus side, I think we older people don't worry so much about what others think of us.
We still like to look good, but we would rather have a few wrinkles than have a surgeon pull our faces into a plastic mask.
Some of us wear our gray hairdos proudly, or else we just cover the gray with whatever dye suits our fancy.
See a man with a bald spot and you'll often see one that shaves it all off as if he had it planned all along.
Another plus side to getting older--our eyesight begins to fail us and (guess what!)
that makes everyone look better.
We can't see the flaws like we once could.
On the downside, we find we can't always ignore some of the things we used to.
Last night when I woke up with a heavy feeling in my chest, I debated whether it was from all the acidy tomatoes I had eaten, or whether I needed to call 911 to get emergency medical help.
I look at myself in the mirror and think, I may not feel too old, but I am for sure old enough to have to consider a heart attack as something not too far out of the realm of possibilities.Another down side--you may only pack on a pound or two a year, but we know what that means.
The more candles on the cake, the more likely we are to be packing extra pounds around the old midsection.
That in turn causes health problems--diabetes, high cholesterol and triglycerides, high blood pressure, and on and on and on.
We wind up with problems in body parts that we didn't even know we had.
Thank goodness for Google and all the health networks available with all the symptoms, side effects, and health alerts that any aging computer savvy middle-age-going-on-senior might have.
Here it is already August--and the next thing you know it will be autumn.
Probably in the next week or so Halloween decorations will be in the stores.
Time passes by, we flip the calendars and wonder what happened to summer.
It used to seem like it lasted so long and now it just flashes by with the speed of life.Copyright (c) August 2010 L.S.
Fisherhttp://earlyonset@hotmail.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 25, 2010>
Life is more fun and exciting when we move through it with anticipation.
It is easy to get into a rut or a funk when all you have to look forward to is drudgery.
Jim was always the traveler in the family, and he was happiest when we had an upcoming trip.
He would plan for months and pack weeks in advance.
"I have to have something to look forward to," he would always say.
Later, to make it through the caregiver years, I took Jim's advice.
I've kept up the habit of marking my calendar months in advance when I have an upcoming event or trip.
It doesn't take a major event to give my spirits a makeover--I've learned to find joy in unexpected places.
I spent last week in Minneapolis for a benefits conference which is held in three or four different locations throughout the year.
Minneapolis isn't the most popular location, but it is the one that worked out for my schedule.
To sweeten the deal, my co-worker and I went online and found tickets to "A Streetcar Named Desire" at the Guthrie Theatre.
With the extensive traveling I've done throughout my lifetime, I had not once been in Minnesota.
As the plane came in for a landing, the thing that caught my eye was all the lakes.
It looked like every housing development was clustered around its own lake.
Our hotel was at the city center and Brenda, my co-worker, and I pulled our suitcases toward the exit with full confidence we could catch a taxi to the hotel.
All the taxis were on the other side of the street behind a barricade.
I had never seen a setup like that before.
We found a policeman and asked him how to cross the street.
If that doesn't make you feel like a country cousin, nothing will.
He called it "poor design" and we had to go back inside the building, down a level, cross under the street and then up a level to come out on the other side.
On the way to the hotel, Brenda asked the taxi driver where the Mall of America was located.
"It's the other side of the airport," he told us.
"It will cost you about $80 for a taxi from your hotel." How can you go to Minneapolis and not visit the iconic Mall of America?
Isn't that sort of un-American?
Not to be deterred, we checked with the concierge, knowing that downtown hotels would not want to lose customers because it cost so much to get to the huge tourist attraction across town.
Sure enough, he told us we could exit the hotel turn the corner, go two blocks and take the light rail to the Mall of America for $1.75.
Much, much better than $80.
The best way to get to the Guthrie Theatre where the Tennessee Williams' play was showing was on the light rail.
We rode the street car known as Hiawatha to watch a "Street Car Named Desire." The theatre was only two blocks from a Transit Station, and when the play let out at 10:45 p.m. we walked to the station.
The trains passing by in the other direction were jammed with Twins fans who had boarded at Target Stadium.
Before long, we hopped on and rode back to the hotel.
Round trip equals $1, experience priceless.
We kept noticing a lot of young ladies wearing tiaras and beauty queen sashes.
They were in town for the Queen of the Lakes competition and the Aquatennial Torchlight Parade.
Before the parade, hundreds of runners participated in a 5k run.
All this took place within a half-block of our hotel.
I don't recall ever seeing so many people run and the parade turned out to be the parade that never ended.
Long after we were back in the hotel room we could still hear the pa-rum-pa-rum-pum of the high school bands.
As a bonus, the conference turned out to be one of the best I had ever attended.
Interesting speakers updated us on all things benefit related.
While riding the light rail, we noticed all the people climbing on board with their suitcases to go to the airport.
The train stopped at two different terminals, but a chart showed that we would get off at Lindberg to fly on Delta.
Okay, we could take a taxi for $40, or ride the train for $1.75.
It wasn't a tough decision at all.
All in all, it was a great little break from everyday work.
Having something to look forward to helps me wake up in the mornings and want to get out of bed.
Having a good time and not breaking the bank, is a plus.
Still, as much as I enjoyed it, a week was long enough and I woke up with a singing heart this morning because I'm at my favorite place--home.
copyright (c) July 2010 L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 19, 2010>
The Alzheimer's Association sent a newsletter this week that says "pear" shaped women are at higher risk of developing Alzheimer's than "apple" shaped women.
This is the first health bulletin I recall that gives apple-shaped women, who carry excess weight around their waists, an advantage over pear-shaped ladies, who carry their weight on their hips and thighs.
I know most women would prefer to be slim and trim, but that becomes harder as we grow older.
In fact, a recent obesity report says that slightly more than one-third of Americans are obese.
Obesity in my home state of Missouri is 29.3 % and we weigh in at No.
12 in the state rankings.
If you don't consider yourself to be obese, but merely overweight, you should check the guidelines.
BMI (body mass index) is used to determine whether an adult is merely overweight or obese.
If your index is in the 25-29.9 range, you are overweight.
Anything over the magic 29.9 indicates obesity.
If you don't know your BMI, you can find free BMI calculators on the Web.
One thing is obvious when I look at mine--I just need to be a couple of inches taller.
Who would have ever thought my goal in life would be to have a BMI that falls into the "overweight" category.
I've been honest enough to rank myself with the apple shapes for many years.
The extra weight around my middle makes it hard for me to tie my shoes and dang near impossible for me to polish my toenails.
That is a major problem during the sandal-days of summer.
The only thing I can say is that once I huff and puff until I get it done, the super-duper nail polish I buy stays in place for several weeks.
Finding my way around polishing my toenails doesn't make me any healthier.
Apple shapes have a greater risk of cardiovascular disease.
The recommendation for both pear-shaped and apple-shaped women is, of course, to lose weight.
Higher risks for any obesity-linked disease have to do with the type of fat stored in our bodies.
Women who carry their weight on their behinds, hips and thighs store the kind of fat that increases their risk of Alzheimer's.
Cognitive tests show a relationship between the amount of fat and forgetfulness.
I have high cholesterol and triglycerides.
My apple shape puts me at a higher risk for heart attack, diabetes, high blood pressure, and stroke.
Holy cow, that should be enough to get me on a serious diet.
It is easier to think of dieting right after my cholesterol and fat rich breakfast of bacon and eggs.
I have been a bad, bad apple-shaped woman this morning.
I don't make a habit of eating such a breakfast, but there's something about a Saturday morning that makes it irresistible.
I'm usually in such a rush that I'm lucky to eat an English muffin or bagel.
Skimping on breakfast goes against my upbringing.
I was raised to believe that a day should start with a good breakfast.
Health and nutrition guides tout the importance of breakfast based on student test scores and adult productivity in the workplace.
Any diet aficionado will tell you to eat your calories earlier in the day.
I'm pretty sure most diets don't recommend the kind of breakfast I ate this morning, but the general idea of taking time for breakfast is there.
The bottom line is that to reduce Alzheimer's risk, pear-shaped women should lose weight.
Don't we all know that exercise and losing weight is part of a healthy lifestyle?
I have a gym membership and, at least most of the time, opt for low calorie, no-sugar, omega rich foods, I lose probably fifty pounds a year, but it's the same five pounds over and over.
Genetics determine our body shape, and we just need to do the best we can with our inheritance from our foremothers.
Living a long life isn't the only goal we have as intelligent human beings.
We are stewards of our bodies and want to live happy, healthy, independent lives.
copyright July 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 11, 2010>
Alzheimer's Advocates throughout the United States have worked with their home states to develop a plan to prepare for the silver tsunami made up of aging baby boomers.
So far twelve states have completed their plans.
Another eighteen states, including Missouri, are developing plans.
In addition to the expected elected officials and aging professionals, the nineteen member Missouri Task Force includes a person with memory loss and a caregiver.
Community Forums were held throughout the state to address the challenges of families facing Alzheimer's disease.
The 110,000 Missourians who have Alzheimer's disease are cared for by 180,000 unpaid caregivers who provide 156 million hours of unpaid care.
Most caregivers want to care for their loved one at home as long as possible.
With the necessary support and services in place, this army of dedicated unpaid caregivers can save the state $1.7 billion.
The Missouri Community Forums helped the Task Force pinpoint the areas that needed attention.
The concerns family members voiced at the Alzheimer's Association Mid-Missouri Chapter's forum were: 1.
Access to early and accurate diagnosis by doctors and health care professionals.
2.
Availability of affordable home health and respite care to keep loved ones at home longer.
3.
Investment from the state of Missouri for Alzheimer's research.
This short list of goals is reasonable, and any caregiver can attest to their validity.
Early diagnosis is important.
If dementia-like symptoms are caused by a treatable condition, it is important to take proper measures to address the underlying problem.
If the diagnosis is Alzheimer's, a proper treatment regimen can be started when it does the most good.
Early diagnosis helps the family plan for the future.
Affordable home health and respite are basic needs when a loved one is cared for in the home.
One person cannot be awake and alert twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.
Providing care for a person with Alzheimer's is a huge undertaking!
Not only do states need a plan, individuals need one to prevent burnout and illness.
A care plan designed to provide relief for the primary caregiver with home health support and occasional respite care will keep people in the comfort of their own homes longer.
The state of Missouri annually spends $100 million in Medicaid for dementia long term care.
By investing in Alzheimer's Service Grants to support families caring for their loved ones at home, the state could save millions in Medicaid dollars.
The Missouri Alzheimer's State Plan will be delivered to the governor in November as part of Alzheimer's Awareness Month.
It is a fiscal responsibility of our elected officials to tap into this valuable resource of dedicated caregivers.
Copyright (c) July 2010, L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com To see which states have plans: http://www.alz.org/national/documents/StatePlanMap.pdf
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 5, 2010>
Ask most people their favorite part of Independence Day, and their automatic response would be "The fireworks." What's not to love about exploding patterns of brilliant color and the thunderous booms of deluxe pyrotechnical wonders?The fireworks displays are not my favorite part of the holiday, perhaps because as a Vietnam Veteran, Jim had serious problems dealing with the warlike sounds.
Have you ever thought about how hard it is to make it through the 4th of July without being exposed to fireworks?
It's really unavoidable.As dementia began to affect his reasoning, Jim regressed to the time of war and the posttraumatic stress that went with it.
He called me at work one day.
"Those boys!
Those mean boys!" I couldn't get him to tell me what had happened.
I was afraid he had hit one of them with the car.
I came home to see what had upset him so much, and he finally stopped shaking long enough to tell me the neighbor boys had set off some firecrackers as he drove by.So after years of avoiding fireworks, I've watched the fireworks display at Truman Lake for the past two years.
J.B. and Wanda have their house festively decorated and the food is fantastic.
The breeze and cooler temperatures this year were perfect for sitting on the back patio visiting with them and my son and daughter-in-law.More important than the fireworks and food is spending time with friends and family.
My sixteen-year-old grandson lit the fireworks in the yard.
Between choosing and lighting the fireworks, he checked his cell phone for text messages.
My twelve-year-old granddaughter and I made arrangements to go see the latest vampire movie.
My grandchildren are growing up so fast that I chide myself for being so involved in work and writing projects that I don't spend enough time with them.While I was at the lake, my youngest son and his family drove to my house to watch fireworks at Julie's backyard celebration.
It doesn't seem that long ago that when Rob and Julie's brother wanted to go, Julie always asked, "Can I go with?"After an evening spent with friends, Rob and his family planned to leave early for their Colorado vacation.
They were asleep by the time I got home, but my seven-year-old granddaughter met me at the door with a hug.
She always sleeps with me, and had told her mom and dad she was waiting up for "Grandma Linda." I tucked her in and she was fast asleep by the time I was ready for bed.The next morning, she cuddled up next to me while I drank my coffee and opened the "Why?" book.
I read the questions, and she read the answers.
While she read about molecules, my youngest grandson brought his play golf game into the living room to practice his swing.
You would have thought he made a hole in one when he hit the ball over his dad's head and into the space between the couch and wall.
Then he found a handheld bowling game and wanted his dad to make it work."The batteries must be dead," Rob said.
Pretty soon, the game was up and running."You must have figured it out," I said.
Rob told me he hadn't figured it out at all.
I guess you can't expect a grownup to compete with an almost three-year-old.Spending time with family was always Jim's favorite activity.
If he had never had dementia, I bet he would have tolerated, perhaps enjoyed, watching the brilliant aerial kaleidoscopes while surrounded by loved ones.
It is for certain he would have been a proud dad and grandpa if he could see his family now.
Jim would have savored every moment and have recognized the thunderous sounds to be a national celebration of independence and known that he had done his part to keep America free.copyright (c) July 2010 L.S.
Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 26, 2010>
All eyes were on fathers last Sunday as we celebrated Fathers Day.
During Sunday worship which naturally focused on fathers, our pastor talked about what a great father his son is to Lake.
When Lake misbehaves, his dad gets on eye level to talk to him.
That eye-to-eye contact is key to dealing with inappropriate behavior.Communication is a problem in any relationship, and can become a major challenge when your loved one has dementia.
To keep the lines of communication open, you can develop a strategy to focus on the feelings and not the words.Jim sometimes said just the opposite of what he meant.
If he said, "It's cold in here!" and he was sweating, I knew he meant "hot." As the disease progressed, and aphasia silenced Jim, I learned to read his body language and facial expressions to communicate with him.
If he cried, I didn't assume he was sad, I knew he might be hurting.Some strategies to help keep the lines of communication open with your loved one:Keep good eye contact as you speak.Use short simple words and sentences, but don't use Elderspeak or baby talk.
You are communicating with an adult who has a disease that affects his or her ability to process information.Pause to give your loved one time to process what you have said.
Don't expect a quick response, or even an appropriate one.Use gestures to reinforce your words.
Early in the disease when Jim was still able to drive I learned to point left, rather than say "Turn left."Tone of voice matters.
When you speak in a sharp tone, the person may become anxious or combative.
If you speak too rapidly or softly, they may not catch what you are saying.Validate the person's concerns.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, June 24, 2010>
I submitted an article to Alzheimer's Reading Room about my caregiving experience.
The Reading Room is an excellent source of information about Alzheimer's and includes everything from research information to personal stories like mine.
Kudos to Bob DeMarco for maintaining and constantly updating this excellent site!Alzheimer's Reading Room: What is it like being an Alzheimer's caregiver?
Unconditional Love
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 21, 2010>
ICARA (Investigational Clinical Amyloid Research in Alzheimer's) is conducting a global study on a drug called bapineuzumab which may slow the progression of Alzheimer's.
Trials will be conducted in more than 20 countries, including the United States.
Unlike many studies which exclude those with early onset Alzheimer's, eligibility for the Bapi study starts at age 50.
An online prescreening questionnaire is available to help you determine if you, or your family member, meet the other requirements for the study.
Whether you enter into a drug study has a lot to do with your personality.
They are not for everyone.
It may be ideal for you if you are the type of person who understands the study drug may not help you, and could cause undetermined side effects.
When Jim was in the early stages of Alzheimer's we made the decision to enter him in a Phase III drug study.
My sons helped me make the decision, because Jim had trouble communicating and I wasn't sure that he understood the possibilities or the downside.
They both agreed that since all the drugs available only treated symptoms, their dad would not want to bypass a chance to participate.
As the primary caregiver I felt it was my responsibility to vet how a drug study works.
The upside to a drug study is you have the support of a medical team, laboratory services and testing without any cost.
For those who are struggling with the costs of testing or expensive treatments, this is a big incentive.
Through the drug study Jim participated in, we found a neurologist who was considered the top in his field.
Jim was given thorough exams, an MRI, and other tests without any charge to us or our insurance company.
Jim developed side effects--mostly stomach distress--and had to discontinue the study.
We kept the same neurologist who monitored Jim throughout the progression of his dementia.
Even after Jim's death, the neurologist read the brain autopsy report to let me know that Jim had corticobasal degeneration and not Alzheimer's.
Many people participate in drug trials not particularly for their own benefit, but to be a part of the investigative process to help people who have not yet developed the disease.
Effective treatment for Alzheimer's is the key to preventing a national crisis as the baby boomers age.
The study drug, bapineuzumab, is not a cure for Alzheimer's, but slowing the progression of the disease can ease the emotional and financial burden of Alzheimer's.
What are some of the benefits from slowing the progression of Alzheimer's?
* People would remain in the mild stages longer.
* People with dementia could remain in their home longer before requiring long term care.
* Fewer people would be in the severe stages.
In the early stages, our greatest hope was to stop whatever was affecting Jim's cognitive ability.
As we worked through eliminating other treatable disorders, we often said, "If he doesn't get any worse, we can deal with this." Jim had changed, but he could still play his guitar, enjoy his grandchildren, and could have continued on with a productive, happy life.
When the world was faced with an AIDS crisis, research made it possible for some people to live with HIV and never develop AIDS.
Why is it beyond the realm of possibility that a drug may someday be available to slow the progression of Alzheimer's so that our loved ones would never move into the late stages of Alzheimer's?
This drug does not promise to be a cure, but it is a step in the right direction.
Call 1-888-770-6366 or visit www.icarastudy.com for more information about the ICARA study.
copyright(c)June 2010 L.S.
Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 12, 2010>
 It's hard to believe that our "Let's Cream Alzheimer's" Ice Cream Social and Balderdash Championship is only a week away.
We don't expect to make a lot of money at the social; in fact, we are relying on free will donations.
What we hope to do is raise awareness of Alzheimer's and our Memory Walk, and have fun, of course.The ice cream social is a new idea and a learning experience for us and has been somewhat of a challenge because our Memory Walk committee is so small.
We will be depending a lot on our friends at Fairview, relatives, and the youth group at church.
Never having had a social before, we aren't sure how much ice cream we'll need.
We don't know if people will show up.
Will we have enough Balderdash players?The problem with a disease like Alzheimer's is caregivers are often too tied down taking care of their loved ones to participate in fundraisers.
A caregiver can be worn slick from having to make a lot of hard decisions.
Those that have been through the gamut of caring for and losing a loved one to Alzheimer's often want to put the past behind them.
I can't blame them for trying to get their lives back on an even keel.Alzheimer's is not a glamorous disease, and often one that people try to hide from the world.
The person with dementia does not want to be treated like a child, and families may be embarrassed by their loved one's behavior.Too often caregivers don't realize how much they can benefit from Alzheimer's Association employees and volunteers.
A speaker at one of our support group meetings helped me deal with Jim's quirkiness.
The speaker said to gauge behavior by asking yourself, "So what?" If the problem isn't endangering anyone, "So what?"His practical advice helped me through some sticky situations.
One day Jim's mom called to tell me he was out in the yard naked and wouldn't come inside.
She couldn't get him to put his clothes back on.
She was so distressed."I'll be right home," I assured her.
"He probably had a reason for taking his clothes off.
He's either too hot, or he's had an accident.""But he's out in the yard without any clothes on.""Don't worry about it," I said.
We lived in the country on a gravel road without much traffic.
"So what if someone comes by?
If they don't want to see a naked man, they can keep their eyes on the road.
After all, he's is our yard."Recently, I saw a letter on a health Website written by a woman whose husband had Alzheimer's.
She was so embarrassed by her husband's behavior that she didn't want to take him out in public.
She felt like people were staring at them.
My comment was, "Jim didn't notice people staring, and I got to the point where I didn't care."We continued to go places that Jim enjoyed and didn't worry about what others might think.
I always considered Penny Braun, former executive director of the Mid-Missouri Chapter, to be my mentor about Alzheimer's.
Penny always said, "Ice cream solves a lot of problems."Following the advice of a wise lady, I took Jim to Dairy Queen almost daily.A few days ago, I was looking for a specific picture of Jim.
Digging through the boxes of pictures I don't have in albums yet, I came across pictures of Jim in all stages of the disease.
It tugged at my heart to see him in the early stages when he wore his cowboy hat, boots, and 501 Levis.
He and his brother sat on the patio playing guitars together.
I remember that day--Jim was having trouble finding the right chords to play.
Jim, the master guitarist missing a simple chord change and forgetting the lyrics to songs he had sung for years.Yes, those days are behind me now, but I believe those of us who have finished our journeys should help those who are still traveling.
I hope we "cream" Alzheimer's in my lifetime.
All I know is that we can't give up on finding a cure.If some of us don't step out of our comfort zone and put effort into bringing Alzheimer's to the forefront, millions of Americans will always struggle with the daily challenges of caregiving and the heartache of a cruel and debilitating disease.
We need to put the research spotlight on the challenge to end Alzheimer's."Let's Cream Alzheimer's" is a good way to join a mission statement and a fun event.
So if you are in Sedalia on June 19, join us 7 PM at the Celebration Center while we "cream" Alzheimer's.
It's a time to relax and enjoy.
The hardest decision you will need to make is "two scoops, or one?"Copyright (c) June 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com/http://boomerobics.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, June 6, 2010>
Between Memorial Day and writing two stories about pets to submit to Chicken Soup for the Soul, I've found myself thinking a lot about special pets our family has had over the years.
This was further reinforced by seeing two families giving away pets in Wal-Mart's parking lot today.
I couldn't help but think about the time we did that.
Lacy was a stray dog came to live at our house.
She promptly delivered a litter of puppies and then got hit by a car.
We had six puppies to hand feed.
I named one little long-haired puppy Ragamuffin, and figured I might as well get used to her because I didn't think we could give her away.
Today, I was trying to remember the names of all the puppies, and was a little surprised that I couldn't.
I remembered the long-haired male was Jiffy.
Two little puppies looked so much alike we named them Eppie and Popo.
I'm blank on the other names.
I remember when we took them to the parking lot a family came over and their little boy started manhandling the puppies.
I cringed inside and worried about the puppy when the boy walked off clutching him around his middle.
Ragamuffin was shortened to Muffin, a name that suited the loving sweet-natured dog.
She was a member of our household for several years until she disappeared one Thanksgiving Day.
I was heartbroken and swore I would never let myself get that close to a dog again.
Jim and I were lying in bed reading on a cold February night when Eric announced he had adopted a puppy at the pound and had named him Tuffy.
Jim was really upset with him and said, "Take that dog back!" Eric showed the puppy to his dad, but Jim said, "I'm not holding it!" Eric picked up the dog and was gone for a while.
When he came back, Jim said, "What did you do with the puppy." "I dumped him," Eric said.
Jim jumped out of bed and started getting dressed.
"We have to go find him!
He'll freeze to death!" "I'll go get him," Eric said.
"He's out in the garage." "You go get him right now," Jim said, "and bring him here." Well, Jim held "Tuffy" and decided his name had to be Bubba.
Along with renaming the dog, he staked a claim as owner.
Eventually, Eric gave him the dog.
When Jim went on vacation to visit his family in Idaho, he called every night checking on us, but mostly checking on Bubba.
His cousin told me, "I could understand Jim being homesick for you and the kids, but he's coming home early because he misses his dog!" Jim and Bubba were inseparable.
Even after Jim was in the nursing home, I could mention Bubba and a sparkle lit up Jim's eyes.
"I took Bubba to the vet today," I told Jim one night at the while I fed him.
Jim had become silent, but his eyes shifted away from the TV and toward me.
"You know what the vet told me?
He said Bubba needed to go on a diet." Jim smiled slightly.
The vet had been telling us for years that Bubba was too fat.
Well, he did weigh 90 pounds, but he was really big boned and had ten pounds of fur we had sheared off in the summertime.
"You know what I told him?" I asked Jim.
He gave me a look that showed he was really listening to the story.
After all, I was talking about Bubba, his best furry friend.
"I told the vet 'Bubba is twelve years old.
He is fat, has always been fat, and always will be fat.
I'm not about to put him on a diet now!'" Jim laughed.
Yep, that was the way it was with Bubba.
He had never gone hungry and there was no need to try it in his old age.
Bubba died while Jim was in the nursing home.
I talked about Bubba from time to time and never indicated that he was gone.
In Jim's heart, his dog Bubba was always happy enough to wag his whole body, just like always.
It is hard to lose a pet, and sometimes you don't think you ever want to go through the heartbreak again.
But when you don't take that chance, you miss out on so much.
Jim thought he didn't want another dog, but dementia couldn't erase the spot in his heart reserved for Bubba.
Copyright (c) June 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 30, 2010>
I've heard that some people fear public speaking more than death, but I enjoy speaking when I know my subject well.
Because of Jim's dementia, Alzheimer's is a subject that I have become intimately acquainted with over the past fifteen years.
Some of my presentations are more lighthearted than others, but the one I was scheduled to give at 6 PM Friday night--the day that marked the beginning of Memorial Day Weekend--was Dementia Specific Training for a group of in-home service providers.
When my contact, Tracy, suggested the last Friday of May, I had no plans to go out of town for the weekend so it fit nicely into my schedule.
The closer the time came for the program, I kept thinking about how I would be standing between a group of workers who had finished their workweek and a weekend of fun, sun, and getting away from it all.
How restless were these hardworking individuals going to be when their holiday was delayed by a full one-hour of training?
Would they pay attention, or were they going to keep checking their watches and mentally be on the way to the lake for a weekend of boating?
Before I began, I handed out note sheets with several fill-in-the-blank statements for each of the areas covered during the training: An Alzheimer's overview, Communications and Behavior, daily activities, and helping families cope.
"This dementia specific training is important to provide good care for your clients with Alzheimer's.
You can fill in the blanks on the note sheet as we go." It didn't take me long to discover the audience was attentive, asked questions, and shared some of their personal experiences.
One lady was a primary caregiver for her mother who had Alzheimer's and another expressed her concern that her husband was beginning to show signs of dementia.
A young lady told me she couldn't visit her grandmother at the same time as her mother because they looked too much alike and grandma was confused as to which one was her daughter.
It was an interactive discussion with a group that was eager to learn and took notes in addition to the fill-in-the-blank forms I had given them.
I forged onward, as they interwove their personal experiences into the context of the training session.
By being part of the program they took ownership of the information they needed.
I ended by reading "Honor Our Everyday Heroes" from Early Onset Blog: The Friendship Connection.
As I read, I glanced up to see participants brushing away tears.
My voice broke slightly on the words, "I think about how Jim told our sons they were his heroes, and how prophetic his words would become.
They truly became his heroes when they cared for him with love and respect as he faded away." After the presentation, some left in a hurry to begin their weekend, but a few lingered for more discussion and to get some pamphlets I had left in the car.
After our final goodbyes, I started my car to hear the opening bars of "Jingle Jangle." A rush of feelings swept over me as I instantly flashed back to Honolulu, Hawaii, 1969, and a small chapel where Jim and I exchanged the vows that marked the beginning of our life together.
On our wedding day we heard "Jingle Jangle" for the first time and dubbed it "our" song.
I thought about living on Humboldt Street in Manhattan, Kansas, and how one night we were shopping and heard "Jingle Jangle" and followed the sound to a stereo system.
Seeing it as a divine sign, we bought the walnut stereo cabinet once they agreed to include the "Jingle Jangle" album.
I became lost in the feelings of 1970 when we held our newborn baby in our arms and celebrated with Mama Burgers and Papa Burgers at A & W. Life lay ahead of us like a yellow brick road leading us from Kansas to a wonderful land "somewhere over the rainbow." Hopes and dreams helped us through the hard times of too much month at the end of the money.
The song ended, and the sixties drifted to the back of my mind to rest in the area of my brain where I store my long-term memories.
I put my car in drive and left the parking lot.
My mind was already on the weekend ahead--a time for honoring those who served our country and remembrance of love that is never truly lost.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 23, 2010>
For the past ten years, I've joined with other Alzheimer's advocates to proclaim loud and clear that Alzheimer's disease will have a detrimental impact on this country's financial future.
We who advocate for Alzheimer's research and programs sometimes feel neglected.
Mega resources  are spent on diseases that are better known or understood, or sometimes trendy in the sense that it catches the attention of the media or a popular celebrity.
The first hurtle for Alzheimer's advocates is to educate legislators, and the American public, that Alzheimer's isn't a joke about people getting older and more forgetful.
We point out, politely of course, that Alzheimer's isn't getting much of the National Institute of Health's research pie and still far short of the $1 billion goal we had the first year I attended the Public Policy Forum.The Alzheimer's Association has just released a report "Changing the Trajectory of Alzheimer's Disease: A National Imperative." Research dollars for Alzheimer's is pushed to the bottom of the list--after all, it affects only elderly people, doesn't it?
It's just a little forgetfulness, isn't it?
There is medication that slows or stops the progression, don't you know?
The answers to those questions are wrong, wrong, and wrong again.
Alzheimer's is an incurable brain disorder that brings about brain cell death.
It is an economic and emotional hardship on the family when their loved one is diagnosed with dementia.
Harry Johns, President and CEO of the Alzheimer's Association, said, "Today, there are no treatments that can prevent, delay, slow or stop the progression of Alzheimer's."   As advocates, we tell our personal stories and rely on staggering statistics to persuade legislators to allocate more funds to eradicate this devastating disease.
Alzheimer's has forever changed the lives, and dreams of more than five million Americans.
An investment in research now can drastically change the trajectory of Alzheimer's.
Without effective treatment or a cure we can expect the number of people 65 or older with Alzheimer's to increase from 5.1 million today to 13.5 million by the middle of the century.
This is the human tragedy of the disease.
Financially, by the time Medicare, Medicaid, medical expenses, and providing care are factored in--Alzheimer's disease will cost the United States $20 trillion (with a T) over the next forty years.Of course, the ultimate goal is to find a vaccine to prevent Alzheimer's or treatment that will cure the disease.
Even a five-year delay would reduce the 2050 numbers to 7.7 million instead of the 13.5 million projected to develop the disease.
When Jim developed an Alzheimer's type of dementia, I learned what an un-funny joke it is.
I received the wakeup call informing me that dementia doesn't just affect the elderly.
Jim was only forty-nine when the relentless process began.
After ten years, the disease won--just like it has 100% of the time.
The only survivors at Memory Walk are the family members who learned that through perseverance, faith, and unconditional love, they can endure the decade or decades leading to the journey's end.Has the time come that we need to end our polite request for Alzheimer's research dollars?
Has the time come for us to demonstrate the same perseverance for research that we showed to survive caregiving, or living with a disease without a cure?
A first step is to push for the National Alzheimer's Project Act.
This legislation would develop a national plan through a National Alzheimer's Project Office.
With the combined efforts of stakeholders in the disease--caregivers, people with the disease, providers--and federal government agencies, a comprehensive plan could be devised to address all the issues caused by Alzheimer's.
Not only do we need research so that someday we have survivors, we also need programs for those living with the disease.Age does not cause Alzheimer's, but it is the No.
1 risk factor.
Without a united effort to find the elusive cure for this disease, those of us who live to be eighty years old will have a fifty percent chance of developing Alzheimer's.
I don't think it is selfish of me to admit I don't want to spend the last years of my life with a brain disorder that will rob me of my memories.
The time has come to kick our advocacy up a notch to change the trajectory of Alzheimer's.copyright (c) May 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.comhttp://boomerobics.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 17, 2010>
At our last human resources meeting, our speaker's topic was helping families in financial crisis.
It made me think about families dealing with the emotional and economical strain when a loved one has dementia.
Our speaker, Cynthia Crawford, with the extension office, has seen an alarming increase in the number of people who find themselves in financial distress.
No one wants to change their lifestyle, but hard economic times call for taking action to reduce the adverse consequences.Employment has turned into shaky ground for a lot of people as financial woes beget more financial woes.
Retired people see their nest eggs dwindle, not through spending, but through an unpredictable stock market or low interest rates on investments.
We all know that as our income increases, we proportionally step up our standard of living to match.
This is perfectly acceptable, as long as we put money aside for emergencies--or as our parents always called it--for a rainy day.
When our family hits a financial crisis and income plummets, it is human nature to want to hold to our standard of living.
In fact, our first reaction is denial that we need to take action.
Our standard of living is closely connected to our self-esteem, and we begin to think we are failures if we can't pay our country club dues.First thing you need to do, according to Cynthia, is cut expenses.
Pay your mortgage, utilities, and insurance first.
If you don't have enough left to pay other bills, call the people you owe and explain the circumstances.
They will be more willing to work with you, if you make the first contact.Giving your attention to what you need rather than just what you want can lower your stress levels.
Eating at home is healthier and cuts costs in two ways.
You pay less for meals and don't throw away leftovers or food that spoiled while you pick up fast food at a drive-thru window.
Cynthia has some good advice for those who may lose their jobs.
"Don't sit in the basement and sink into depression." If you have lost your job, you've lost precious time if you do not immediately sign up for unemployment.
Unemployment is not retroactive and if you don't sign up for it, you get nothing.
I might add that if you lose your job because of Alzheimer's, sign up for disability.
When Jim was diagnosed with dementia, I was fortunate to have a good job with health insurance benefits.
We made it through the years he lived at home partly because we had always lived within our means and found great pleasure in the simple things in life--camping, fishing, and spending time with family and friends.
No matter how frugal you may be, long-term care may be beyond your means, and we were no exception.
When my sons and I toured nursing homes, the first bit of information I learned was that I didn't earn enough money to pay the monthly bill!
Through the Alzheimer's Association support group, I learned about division of assets.
Sure, we had to sacrifice some of our dreams--we sold our lake property and Jim's truck, cashed some CDs, and disposed of other possessions.
In personal life, as in business, downsizing is preferable to losing it all.
I still live in the house Jim and I build with our own hands, and I'm not facing a lifetime of debt from his five-year stay in long-term care.Other good advice from Cynthia is to ask for help.
Check into local agencies that provide support and services that could help you through the transitional period while you bring your financial situation back into balance.
To get help, you have to ask.
People or agencies that can help you may not have any idea that you are in crisis.
If having a family member with dementia has thrown your financial world into a tailspin, don't give into despair.
Instead, look at it as a challenge to your ingenuity and grit.
Check into all available resources, and ask for help.
Take stock of your way of life and work out a plan to protect your family and the possessions that are important to you.copyright (c) May 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.comhttp://boomerobics.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 8, 2010>
When Mother's Day rolls around, we pause to think of how to honor the woman who gave us life.
We might order flowers, buy gift cards, take our moms out for a nice dinner, and find the perfect Hallmark Card.On this special day, I can't help but think of my other mother--my wonderful mother-in-law, Virginia.
From the first day I met her, she treated me with love and respect.
She was both nurturing and feisty.
She was compliant and stubborn.
Virginia could be meek, or fierce, depending on the circumstances.Virginia had a multifaceted personality except when it came to love.
Her love for family was unconditional and unwavering.And there was no doubt Virginia was a wonderful cook.
She could whip up a pie in a few minutes--her capable hands shaping pie dough with the confidence and ease of an expert chef.
Virginia's light rolls and biscuits were to die for.
At Christmas time, she made countless tins of divinity, peanut brittle, sugar cookies, and chocolates.
She packed them up and mailed them to relatives in Oregon.Jim was always willing to help his mother in any way he could.
He built her a home.
He didn't hire it done because we were on a tight budget and didn't have the resources for that.
He strapped on his tool belt and worked on it day after day until it was finished.Virginia lived next door to us--originally we thought that meant she would be close so we could look after her.
It turned out that she was the one that took care of Jim during the early years of his dementia.
She fixed all his meals, kept an eye on him, and when he wandered off, she drove the roads until she found him.
Because of her, Jim was able to stay home for five years.After we made the tough decision to place Jim in long-term care, his mom visited him nearly every day.
She fed him when he could no longer feed himself.
She became acquainted with the staff, and they came to love her for her nurturing care of her son.
Of course, the big tray of cookies and candy at Christmas helped too.Her mother's heart must have cracked each visit, but she never wavered.
She outlived her son, and I know that was one of the saddest moments of her life.
She found comfort knowing that Jim was in a better place.
In her last moments of life she saw the gates of heaven awaiting her.
Virginia smiled as she told us a large crowd was waiting for her--and in front she saw Jim, her brother Tubby, and "Dad" meaning her husband, Bill.Her death was a much a shining example of how to live as her life had been.
On this Mother's Day weekend, I think of Virginia, my other mother, and miss her still.copyright (c) May 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.comBoomer: http://boomerobics.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 2, 2010>
The rain yesterday made me nostalgic.
I couldn't stop thinking about my brothers and sisters, my mom, Grandma and Grandpa Whittle, and other bygone times.
I grew up in the Ozarks and perhaps it was the wind blowing through the trees as storm after storm passed by that had me thinking of the woods of home.Whatever the reason, I never left the house until late afternoon for my annual trip to Jefferson City for the chicken dinner fundraiser hosted by the local Alzheimer's Association Memory Walk Committee.I started going to the dinner and auction years ago when my friend, Ted Distler called me up.
"Linda Fisher," he would say, "are you coming to our chicken dinner this year?""Of course," I always answered.
"I love fried chicken."Fried chicken always makes me think of Sunday dinner when I was a kid.
My mom used to cut up chicken, roll it in flour and cook it in heavy cast iron skillets.
It took a lot of chicken to feed a family with eight kids.
The meal at the chicken dinner last night was much like what we had--crispy chicken, mashed potatoes and gravy, green beans--they even had chocolate sheet cake for dessert."Well, we have a gooseberry pie to auction off," Ted would taunt during his annual calls.
Ted and I were lively bidders on the gooseberry pie.
He usually won, and that's saying something considering how competitive I am.This year, I bought two tickets from one of the coordinators at the Caregiver Conference.
That's when I heard that Ted wasn't planning on being at the chicken dinner.
I called him and, reversing roles, tried to talk him into coming.
I thought he was convinced, because, after all, who was going to bid against me on the gooseberry pie?After eating fried chicken, I perused the live auction items.
Two things caught my eye--gooseberry pie and an oil painting of Native American pots.
Ted wasn't there to save me from the gooseberry pie, so I bought it for a mere $55.
After I bought the oil painting (along with two others), my friend and I headed home."If you have milk, I have pie," I announced, like that was a secret.Boy, did my taste buds come alive when I took my first bite of the pie.
It tasted just like the pie my grandma used to make from the gooseberries grandpa picked.
I closed my eyes as I savored the flavor, and a rush of memories whirled through my brain like a good old Missouri tornado.
I saw my Grandma and Grandpa Whittle and me in our straight-back chairs in the backyard of their little house north of Stover.
Grandpa had gathered a big bucket of gooseberries, and we all stemmed them.
I loved stemming gooseberries and talking with my grandparents.I remember putting salt into the palm of my hand and dipping wet, raw gooseberries in the salt.
The tangy flavor made my mouth water, and my jaws locked from the flavorful burst of the berries when I bit into them.
The only thing better than raw gooseberries was grandma's pie and a cold glass of milk.I picked up the pie plate from the auction and saw a label on the bottom.
This wonderful pie, which turned out to be worth more than the $55 I paid for it, was the creation of Esther Kempker.
Now that I've had a taste of her pie, Ted better be prepared to go the distance, or he'll never outbid me again.Thinking about the gooseberry pie makes me hungry--and I haven't had breakfast yet, unless a banana counts for the most important meal of the day.
It may be decadent to eat pie for breakfast, but my heart is telling me to pour a glass of milk, cut a piece of pie, and close my eyes to feel the love.Copyright (c) May 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.comBoomer Blog: http://boomerobics.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 26, 2010>
Coach Frank Broyles minces no words as he shares his mission to improve quality of life for more than five million Americans with Alzheimer's, their caregivers, and their entire family.
Coach Broyles draws on years of experience at the University of Arkansas and uses his leadership skills to rally family members to form a game plan."Attitude is your No.
1 asset," the coach tells the audience at the Mid-Missouri Chapter's Caregiver Conference.
"You can't be perfect," the coach advises the caregivers.
Rather than be unhappy about shortcomings, caregivers should learn all they can and feel good about doing their best.The coach stresses the importance of having a game plan to provide the best care possible for your loved one.
He urges caregivers to make their loved ones feel safe and loved.
"It's all about communication--be creative and compassionate." He gave an example of creative communication.
If his wife, Barbara, asked to see her mother, he would tell her, "You mother is out of town today."After Coach spoke, his daughter took the stage.
Betsy Arnold and her family moved back in with her parents to help Coach take care of her mother who was in the middle stages at the time.
Betsy's part of the program is laced with humor, but it doesn't keep her from giving nuts and bolts type of information.
Betsy covers everything from the stages of Alzheimer's to the stages of grief.
She thinks the key to communication is to let the person with Alzheimer's control the conversation.Betsy suggests that making eye contact is the key to conversation.
The eyes will help you determine whether your loved one is happy, sad, confused, or frightened.
Betsy learned to communicate by speaking calmly and using positive language.
She found her way through many crises by proclaiming, "Isn't that great?" or "This is going to be so much fun!" When your loved one repeatedly asks the same question, the question is important, and you should answer it like you had just heard it for the first time.When her mother asked to go home, Betsy learned to reassure her and make her feel safe.
Betsy took her mother out for milkshakes as a distraction.
She jokingly admitted her mother went from a size 4 to a size 12 thanks to the milkshake bribes.The last conference speaker was Coach's granddaughter.
Molly Arnold was only twelve years old when her family moved in with her grandparents.
One of the most vivid impressions she had of her family was how they turned a negative into a positive.
When she and some of her cousins were sorting through some of her grandmother's papers, she found the following quote: "Do a good deed today.
If someone finds out, it doesn't count."The Broyles family shares their experiences to encourage other caregivers to allow their love to guide them throughout the difficult circumstances of providing around-the-clock care.
Coach Broyles said, "There is no substitute for touch." He believes touch is vital for everyone, but especially for someone with memory loss.Coach Broyles said that he and Barbara spent many pleasurable hours browsing through their travel scrapbooks.
The photos from their vacations put a smile on Barbara's face and made her happy.
The scrapbook is an activity the entire family can enjoy.
Bringing the past to the present helps you and your loved one reconnect through shared memories.Copyright (c) April 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.comRecommended reading: Coach Broyles Playbook for Alzheimer's Caregivers.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 19, 2010>
I first met Tracy Mobley in Washington DC at the Alzheimer's Public Policy Forum.
It didn't take long for me to discover what an amazing woman she is.
Most of us would crumble if given an Alzheimer's diagnosis at 38 years old.
Tracy became a spokesperson and took action to help others diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer's.Tracy wrote a book based on her journal--Young Hope: The Broken Road.
Tracy has quite a sense of humor.
When I asked her to submit a story for Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love, I'm not sure what I expected.
I don't think I expected a story called "Thank God for Pizza Pockets and Husbands."
But then, knowing Tracy, I shouldn't have been surprised.Tracy collected blocks for a memory quilt that she pieced together honoring our loved ones with Alzheimer's.
She made Jim's block herself!
I was so touched by her thoughtfulness.
Tracy worked diligently to set up Camp Building Bridges for children whose parents have Alzheimer's.With all her accomplishments, Tracy is a truly humble person.
If you ask her what is important to her, I'm sure she would say being a good mom to Austin, a good wife, and faithful to God.In Tracy's Poem, "The Alzheimer's Prayer", she says:One more thing, Dear Lord, before I forget,if I can no longer speakWill You let them know I love themand though I may have changed, I am still the same meAlzheimer's Weekly chose Tracy's film as their pick from the winners of the 2010 Neuro Film Festival.
You may not have had a chance to meet Tracy, but watch James Dreyer's film for a glimpse into her life.Alzheimer's Weekly - Tracy's Entrycopyright (c) April 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.comBaby Boomer Blog: http://boomerobics.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 18, 2010>
It probably wouldn't come as a big surprise to any caregiver to learn that when the University of Indianapolis surveyed 400 Alzheimer's caregivers, 80% identified grief as their No.
1 challenge.
When your loved one has dementia, your grief is ambiguous because it doesn't have a defined beginning.
It just sneaks up on you when you think you're doing a great job of handling everything.
Each time Jim lost a skill, I grieved.
Not only did I grieve the losses, I anticipated more to come.
Yet, I was determined not to become mired in a world of sadness without hope of better days ahead.
Writing helped me chip away at the seemingly insurmountable task of being a primary caregiver.
My journal became my therapy as I wrote about my thoughts, fears, and frustrations.
Along with the bad, I interwove moments of joy and humorous incidents.
I wrote throughout our ten-year journey including April 18, 2005, the day Jim left this world for a better land.
Anyone who reads my blog on a regular basis realizes that writing helped me through the years I was a caregiver, and has turned me into a woman on a mission.
I hope sharing our story will help others who travel this same journey.
Caregivers and people who blog tell their story, and while they write about the abnormal that has become their norm, they find spiritual healing in the midst of chaos.
Writing is therapy for those who struggle with grief.
While collecting and editing 37 true stories for Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love, I often received notes from the authors telling me how cathartic it was to write about their experiences.
I'm a believer in the therapeutic benefits of writing and have completed a first draft of a manuscript on writing as therapy.
I began blogging in 2008 and a year later published my posts in Early Onset Blog: Essays from an Online Journal, and this year released Early Onset Blog: The Friendship Connection.
Sometimes the intensity of re-living the most difficult decade of my life helped me put everything into perspective, but it also left me emotionally drained.
My blog is filled with my non-fiction writing, and you may not realize I also write fiction.
Although all therapeutic writing research is based on non-fiction writing, I find fiction writing to be therapeutic too.
The best thing about fiction--you can make it turn out anyway you want.
I don't know about you, but I've never figured out how to do that in the real world.
Now, I am working on a fiction project, an anthology--A Shaker of Margaritas: Hot Flash Mommas.
This book is going to be a fun project.
Submissions are open to everyone!
Visit www.mozarkpress for details about the Hot Flash Mommas Fiction, Fun, and Forties Writing Contest and the anthology.
Writing may not work for everyone, but I think of it as my lifeline.
When I write my problems down, or craft a story, I can almost feel the tension flowing from my fingertips onto the paper.
___________________________________ Available at www.amazon.com: Early Onset Blog: The Friendship Connection, Early Onset Blog: Essays from an Online Journal, and Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love.
For a book review of the Early Onset Blog books: http://plantcityladyandfriends.blogspot.com/.
Copyright (c) April 2010 L. S. Fisher http://earlyonset.blogspot.com Baby Boomer Blog: http://boomerobics.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 11, 2010>
The only good thing I can say about a long, hard winter is it makes me really appreciate spring.
A spring day gives me renewed hope and vigor.
I now feel capable of tackling those obstinate problems that seemed insurmountable when the wind chill was below zero.
It is refreshing to open the patio doors and have a spring breeze flush out the stale breath of winter.
The sound of twittering birds and barking squirrels are infinitely more welcome than the sound of sleet against my bedroom window.
To me a spring day is like the joy of Easter after the gloom of Good Friday.
It is the rebirth of my spiritual wellbeing.
How could I be depressed or sad when redbuds, dogwood, and lilies provide color against a backdrop of shades of green--grass, leaves, bushes, and evergreens?
Words cannot express the glory of the sun's golden rays.
No one even complains much when driving into the blinding morning or evening sun.I feel like a flower, turning my face toward the sun, and showing bright spring colors.
I am tired of dull and drab.
The winter blahs already seem like a memory, and I walk with a spring in my step.I can even forgive spring its sorrows and the sad days of remembrance.
Jim died on a warm April day five years ago.
For a time, I thought that would make me dread April and the memories of that moment when dementia took Jim away.
In reality, death gave him back to me.
In the midst of losing Jim to dementia, I learned to accept the changes in him and to love him for the person he had become.
It was too painful to remember him as he was before dementia.After Jim died, I could embrace the memories of the man he was before the disease stole him away.
In April 2005, the youthful Jim, the fun-loving man, the person who cherished me and became my best friend was reborn in my memories.
Life goes on and although my babies are grown to men, my four grandchildren bring joy into my life with the dependability of flowers breaking through the soil to brighten the days of spring.Last weekend, my six-year-old granddaughter handed me a sheet of paper and asked me to sign up for art classes."I can't sign up for art classes," I said, "because I can't draw.""Grandma Linda, you don't have to draw, I just need you to sign up.""Okay, then .
.
.
if I don't have to draw, I'll sign up."In a few minutes she handed me a marker and a sketch pad.
"Draw a picture of a flower," she said."Oh, I can draw a flower," I said, and quickly drew a circle surrounded with loops, a stem, and threw in a few blades of grass at the bottom.
Ever the encourager, she said, "That's a good picture, Grandma Linda.
It looks real!""Smell it," I said.
"I bet it smells like a flower."She held the sketch pad up to her nose and took a whiff.
"It smells just like paper!" she declared.
Let's face it, there is no substitute for the real thing.
No matter how dead plants and trees may look during the frigid days of winter, they flourish anew with the passage of time.
A spring day is a new day, a new chapter in life, a time for a fresh start, and a resurgence of hope.
copyright (c) April 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.comVist my baby boomer blog at http://boomerobics.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 5, 2010>
Jim liked to play the lottery, and insisted he would eventually hold the winning numbers and become a millionaire.
I always said I didn't want to win."That doesn't make sense.
Of course, you want to win!" he insisted."No, I don't.
It would just mess up my life," I said.
I had read too many stories about people who won a million dollars and used their newfound wealth to spend themselves into bankruptcy.
Too many people think a jackpot is an infinite amount and when they live a multi-millionaire lifestyle, a measly million didn't go as far as they thought it would.Well, Jim never hit that jackpot, and I simply don't play, so there is no danger of me becoming wealthy overnight.
Still I was surprised to read a story in the paper a few days ago about someone who wasn't thrilled by winning $1 million.Grigory Perelman, a 43-year-old unemployed Russian man, solved a mathematical problem that seemed to be unsolvable and was awarded $1 million for his wisdom.
On the surface he seems to be one smart fellow, but he hasn't accepted his prize money, and isn't sure he will.
Okay, I'll be the first to admit I'm not a mathematical genius, but it seems to me that if you had the choice of (a) being unemployed with little or no income or (b) being handed $1 million, odds are you wouldn't have to be a genius to choose (b).The International Mathematics Congress isn't too surprised since Mr. Perelman previously snubbed the Fields Medal, considered to be the equivalent of a Nobel Prize in Mathematics.
They are willing to give him time to think about the award and are hopeful he will accept it.
I think Perelman should turn the problem into an algebraic equation that plots out his life if he accepts the million versus what happens if he declines.This story made me stop and think about my long-term attitude that I didn't want to win the lottery.
I can't see myself turning down $1 million if someone offered it to me.
I can't help but wonder, what is Grigory thinking?In reality, Jim was the type of person who would turn down $1 million if he thought the money would compromise his principals.
When Jim was in Vietnam, he turned down a purple heart because he didn't consider his wounds to be severe enough to warrant the medal.
He received an Army Commendation medal and never told anyone.
I learned about it when I saw his discharge papers years later.
By then, Jim had dementia and couldn't, or wouldn't, tell me why he received the award.Yes, I could imagine Jim turning down $1 million, but not me--the person who didn't want her life ruined.
I'm much too practical to scoff at instant riches.
On the surface, Grigory Perelman might seem to be foolish to the nth degree, but we don't know about his life, his expectations, his principals, or how much he wants to remain his own man, a private person.Apparently, not everyone wants to be a millionaire.
Geniuses among us realize riches aren't measured by dollars, but you don't have to be brilliant to figure that out.Copyright (c) April 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.comhttp://boomerobics.bogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 27, 2010>
Last Monday I was in Wal-Mart, and as I mulled over the reasoning behind putting no bake cheesecake in the baking aisle, my cell phone rang.
It was my oldest son, Eric.After our greetings, he asked, "Do you remember Pam, the woman you stopped to help after she hit the deer that time?""Sure," I said.
Several years ago, on the drive to visit Jim in the nursing home, I was following a car that was going the same speed.
I thought about passing, but decided to drop behind instead.
Soon, I heard a loud pop and a deer went bouncing off the hood of the other car toward the road.
Another loud thud and a deer went flying toward the ditch.
Shattering glass sprayed in all directions.
The car pulled to the side of the road, and I parked behind.I was worried because a retiree from the company I work for had died after a deer came through his windshield.
I ran to the driver's door and asked the lady if she was okay.
She assured me she was fine, but I stayed with her while we waited for the highway patrol.She introduced herself as Pam, and we soon discovered she worked at the same dealership as my son.
Now all these years later, Eric was calling to tell me that Pam had died the night before.
"Isn't she about my age?" I asked.
How sad that the only time I had ever talked with her was the night she hit the two deer.I always felt fortunate that I had never hit a deer considering how plentiful they are in Missouri.
One morning a few weeks ago, I stopped while seven deer crossed the road in front of me.Just recently, my boss hit a deer in the company car and a few days after it was repaired, he hit another with his farm truck.
I see deer all the time, but I've always managed to slow down and we've all gone safely on our way.Later Monday night on the way home I was thinking about how old my car is getting and decided I needed to buy a new vehicle.
This thought had no more crossed my mind when a deer jumped into the road, bounced off the pavement, and made a flying leap into my lane.
I hit my brakes, but knew the deer and I were on a collision course.
My car thudded into the deer and he careened across my hood.
I had a close up view of the deer's belly and expected him to come crashing through my windshield.
Instead, he skidded across the hood and off the other side.I pulled over to stop on a side road and immediately began to hyperventilate.
With trembling fingers, I dialed a number on speed dial and told my friend what had happened.
I got out of the car to survey the damage, and thankfully, a young man who lived in a house nearby came out with a flashlight to check on me.After the highway patrol accident report, I drove my car home.
It was missing a headlight and had a banged up hood.
I wasn't hurt, and although I can't imagine he made it far, the deer had picked himself up and gone back into the field--makes me feel like I fought the deer and the deer won.The adjuster at Farm Bureau Insurance helped me find a rental car and get my car into the collision center.
So now I'm tooling around in a luxury car, and expecting a deer to jump into the road at any time.
Logically, I have to consider that until this week, I had driven for more than thirty years without hitting a deer, but now I'm a little paranoid that deer are lurking alongside the road waiting for me to drive by.
The deer won't recognize the rental car will they?
How long will it take if I buy a new car before they know it is me driving it?I guess my out-of-control thoughts are caused by my overactive writer's imagination, or from watching too many episodes of Twilight Zone when I was a kid.
That has to be all it is.
Who ever heard of the "Revenge of Bambi"?copyright (c) March 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 20, 2010>
As we wade through the quagmire of life, nostalgia can slam into us with the force of a tidal wave.
During the hardest times, it is easy to suffer a case of the used to be's or might have been's.Unlike physical life, your emotional well-being benefits more from the occasional tidal wave than the predictability of the tide.
Occasional teary eyes about losses can be a healthy release, but constant sadness wears you down and takes a toll on your health as grief robs you of any good days.Dementia can be a sad and lonely disease.
During the ten years of Jim's dementia, I lived only in the present.
I learned to accept him as he was at that moment without comparing him to the man he had been, or worrying about the changes ahead.
I didn't want to become emotionally entangled in reminiscences of better times.
While I was a caregiver, any other time, even rough ones, might seem like the best days of my life.Now, nearly five years after Jim's death, I don't dread memories as much.
They still sneak up on me and catch me off guard.
Yesterday, I opened my patio door to let some fresh spring air into my home, and lit a candle to add a subtle berry scent.
Lighting the candle made me pause as a rush of memories washed over me.A few minutes later, I was putting away the nametag from the Alzheimer's Action Summit and a basket with Jim's driver's license and old eyeglasses caught my attention.
I picked up the license and looked at his picture, saw his vital statistics, and noted with sadness that the license expired in 1998.
When the picture was taken we didn't know Jim would develop dementia.
Jim is gaunt in the photo, and I remember how concerned we were for him at the time.
Inexplicably, he had gone through a period of weight loss, and my heart ached when I held him in my arms and could feel his ribs.It is strange how some of the smallest routine moments can catapult us into another day or time of our lives.
In retrospect, your recollections may be dominated with only good, or entirely bad, memories rather than embracing life's balance.
If you remember only the bad, you let past failures or traumas ruin your present.
If you remember only the good, you lose the value of lessons learned and will repeat the same mistakes.
Memories, like life, need balance.Looking back at your life is like looking at a picture of a scenic landscape.
A gnarled, barren tree may make the picture more appealing than perfection.
You don't feel sorry for the tree--you just see it as a natural development of time and weather.We all develop our own version of gnarled trees.
It may be the result of hard economic times, poor health, addiction, broken relationships, death, or a myriad of calamities.Sometimes an entire forest is decimated by a wildfire, and we see only smoldering remains of a previously lush, living landscape.
The circle of life embraces us and gives us comfort even when we seem to be surrounded by charred ruins.
After the healing power of time, shoots push through the soil, and fast growing trees and shrubs cover the blackened earth.Part of the secret of letting go of the past is to acknowledge you can't go back and change what has already happened.
You don't need to long for how your life was at one time, or regret how different your life could have been if you had made better choices.
You can only move forward with confidence that the best days of your life are ahead of you, and the best one of all is today.copyright (c) March 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 13, 2010>
Once again I made my annual pilgrimage to Washington, DC, and joined other advocates to bring our message to Capitol Hill.
This year my friend, Cindy, and my granddaughter went with me.
We went a few days early to visit the magnificent museums and monuments scattered throughout our capitol city.Of all the sights in DC, the Vietnam Memorial touches me the most.
About twenty years ago, Jim and I went to Washington, DC, on a business trip.
Jim had seen the memorial on TV, and being a Vietnam veteran, it was at the top of his "must see" list.
We walked hand-in-hand past the memorial that first time, tears streaming down our faces, overwhelmed at the sight of the Wall.
The simple, yet majestic, glossy, black granite wall is inscribed with 58,261 names, each representing a life lost.For the past ten years, I've made the trip to Washington, DC, without Jim, but I feel his presence with me, especially when I visit the Wall.
Each time I touch its surface, the tears flow for all those lives lost, and for others destroyed by Vietnam--for the wounded in spirit as well as in body.Vietnam was a burden that rested heavy on Jim's soul.
He struggled with depression verging on despair.
Still, he found solace and healing through his musical talent.
The most unfortunate symptom of Jim's dementia was when his smooth singing voice was silenced.
I became an Alzheimer's advocate and his voice by proxy.A record number of advocates attended the Alzheimer's Action Summit this year.
An alarming number of those with the disease have younger onset.
It may be that younger people are more motivated to take on the insurmountable challenges of a disease that many of them never imagined would affect them.Each of us comes to Washington, DC, from different backgrounds with different stories, or experiences.
We came with "One Voice" and a focused approach to bring Alzheimer's out of the shadows and into the light--hopefully, the spotlight.
While mortality from stroke, HIV, heart disease, prostate and breast cancer has decreased in the period of time from 2000-2006, Alzheimer's deaths have increased by 46.1%.
What is the difference?
We have focused on those diseases and funded research to find effective treatments.Alzheimer's funding in 2009 was $469 million, plus $77 million from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
This is far short of the billions spent each year on other major diseases.
Without the investment in research, we will never have the payout of success.Each of us can make a difference by becoming an advocate.
If you weren't able to make it to the Summit, you can still add your voice to the more than 600 advocates who stormed Capitol Hill with the Alzheimer's message.
Pick up the phone and call, or email your legislators, to ask them to support and co-sponsor:* The Alzheimer's Breakthrough Act (S. 1492, H.R.
3286).
Alzheimer's research would become a priority of the National Institutes of Aging and funding established at $2 billion.
It would also include a study of the unique problems facing those with younger-onset dementia.* Alzheimer's Detection, Diagnosis, Care, and Planning Act will help expedite diagnosis and bundle services to ensure care planning to maintain quality of life.
It is estimated that currently less than half of the people with dementia have been diagnosed.* The National Alzheimer's Project Act (S. 3036, H.R.
4689) would create a National Alzheimer's Disease Plan.
Currently 5.3 million Americans have Alzheimer's and without a cure as many as 16 million will have the disease by mid-century.Alzheimer's is an expensive disease.
Medicare costs are six times higher for a person with Alzheimer's, Medicaid is a staggering nine times higher, and private insurance costs are 26% more.
The monetary cost doesn't even come close to the emotional toll this disease takes on the entire family when a beloved relative develops dementia.
Share your experiences so that our voices will be heard.copyright (c) 2010 L. S. Fisherhttp://earlyonset.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 8, 2010>
Tonight at the Alzheimer's Action Summit Candlelight Vigil more than six hundred voices sang "We Shall Overcome." Accompanied by an acoustic guitar and with candles held high, the sheer grit and determination of the advocates makes overcoming Alzheimer's seem more a palpable possibility that just a lofty goal.Steve spoke of living with Alzheimer's.
How we need to use our voices to deliver a firm message that Alzheimer's is the seventh leading cause of death.
It is time to stop accepting crumbs that fall from the table.
The time of polite asking has come to an end.David Hyde Pierce motivated us to make our VOICE heard at the Capitol, the White House, and across the nation.
Those of us at the Candlelight Rally were joined by more than 10,000 virtual candles.This is the tenth time I've lit my candle at the vigil.
Something seemed different this time.
Maybe it's something as subtle as the name change from Public Policy Forum to Action Summit.
Maybe it's because we didn't just have a vigil, we experienced a rally.
Whatever the difference, the determination and spirit of this group makes me think we really shall overcome.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, March 5, 2010>
Coming from rural Missouri I don't have many occasions to use public transportation.
A trip to the Alzheimer's Action Summit gave me a chance to get more than my fill of it.It seems like things change all the time, but it's never for the better.
An early morning flight used to mean you woke up early and headed for the airport.
(Well, there was that one time when Jim dropped me off and the flight started boarding before he got back from parking the car.)
Now, it means you need to find a place to stay the night before so you can get to the terminal on time.
You have to allow extra time to be scrutinized.I am not the least bit nervous about flying, but things can go awry in a hurry.
Once you've done everything you can--stay the night, get up at an obscene hour, and hop in the hotel van hours ahead of time.
The hotel driver makes the trip several times a day, so you just leave your timely arrival in his capable hands.
The sign plainly says, "Midwest--Terminal A." The driver whipped around the terminal.
"Did I miss it?" he asked."I didn't see it either," I said.
Of course, I was depending on him to see it.
My friend, Cindy, and my granddaughter were in the back seat and they didn't see it either.We looped around the circle again.
This time we stopped in front of another airline and Cindy jumped out to ask them where to find Midwest.
"They moved to Terminal C yesterday, but they haven't changed the sign."Our driver drove us to Terminal C and, sure enough, there they were.
We checked in and paid $20 for every bag we checked.
After having our belongings X-rayed, and thankfully not our bodies, we were seated in the holding area and hooked up to the Internet in no time.Eventually, the pilot showed up.
"No one told me we had changed terminals," he said.
Ooops, shouldn't he have gotten the memo even if the passengers hadn't?
I don't think he was too happy.
Minutes before the boarding call, a flight attendant showed up.We boarded and prepared for take-off.
The pilot taxied, and taxied, and taxied.
We were beginning to think he was going to drive to DC.
I figured the control tower didn't know what the heck Midwest was doing at Terminal C either.
It is possible that the kid at the mike didn't want to clear an unauthorized plane.
We thought maybe the pilot went back to Terminal A to take off on familiar turf.In the air we get the bad news that we will get only complimentary drinks--no snacks and no chocolate chip cookies before 10 a.m.
I was pretty coffee logged so decided to go with juice.
Tomato juice sounded good.
"Do you want plain or spicy?" the flight attendant asked."Might as well have spicy," I said.
"I'm sure I'll have heartburn anyway.""Do you want some lime in it?""Sure, sounds good to me."She poured a small glass and handed it to me.
Wow.
It was really hot, but it was tasty.
And the lime was a great touch.Later the flight attendant brought me the rest of the can.
"No one else wanted any," she said.
A whole plane full of people, and I'm the only one that likes spicy tomato juice?
The spicy tomato juice was Bloody Mary mix.
No wonder the lime tasted so good in it.When we got to DC, the plane looped in a big circle in one direction, reversed the circle in the other direction.
Round and round we go.
Who knows what was going on?
Finally we landed and were on our way to the hotel.Later in the day the big adventure was riding the subway to see the sites.
With no help in sight, a gaggle of tourists tried to decipher the machines.
After several false starts, we finally bought day passes and headed out.While we waited for the first subway, a recorded voice explained that unlike elevator doors, subway doors will crush you like an aluminum can if you get caught in the door.
Well, she didn't say it in those exact words, but that's what she meant.
All I can say is the announcement put the fear of God in me.
I made sure my granddaughter was between Cindy and me because I wanted to make sure that if one of us had to abandon getting on a car my granddaughter would be with one of us and not standing alone on the platform.After a day of ankle-swelling, aching-back walking, and riding on crowded subway cars, we passed by the same set of machines.
Cindy tried to cash in her ticket, but couldn't figure it out while at the same time trying to explain to a bemused tourist how to buy a ticket.
He just wasn't getting it.
I put my ticket in the machine and it said, "See a manager." Yeah, right.
I'm not so sure there is a manager, much less actually finding a human who fit that description."Here," I said, handing the tourist my pass.
"Take this.
It's good for the rest of the day." I knew that with my aching feet, they couldn't pay me to get back on that subway.For sure, traveling is always an adventure.
At least with the afternoon ride home, we don't have to get up early and better yet, Midwest serves those delicious chocolate chip cookies.
I don't think I'll be having any Bloody Mary mix with that.
That would be taking adventure to a whole new level.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 28, 2010>
I believe life is all about balance.
I don't know how it works; I just know it does.
If things are really going well, something bad will happen.
If things are looking so down that the only way is up, you can bet something good will come along.
I couldn't count the times we had a bill come due, and if we didn't have the money on hand, somewhere or somehow we would get a windfall to cover it.One time when we were going through a really tough time, Jim cleaned out his wallet and found a $100 bill tucked away in one of those secret pockets so many wallets have.
One day the phone rang and it was a woman calling from a place Jim had worked several years before.
They had been trying to locate him to send a vacation check they owed him.
The check came in the mail the same day we received a bill for the same amount.In the past few weeks several things happened to remind me of balance.
Thursday night I came home from work to discover a $100 check in the mail for winnings from a writing contest I had entered months ago.Friday night, I went to a play for an evening of relaxation after a hard week at work.
My friend, Cindy, and I had great seats, but I was sitting next to a woman who began to cough.
She coughed and coughed.
I'm thinking I really don't want to catch something with a trip coming up soon.When I got home from the play, I was looking forward to a good night's sleep.
I walked through the door and smelled something burning.
I checked the usual suspects: my coffee pot, my curling iron, and my iron.
They were all off.
Following my nose I headed toward the basement to discover my heat pump was making an unusual humming sound.
I checked the vents and no air seemed to be blowing out of them.
I turned off the heat pump and tried to figure out what to do.
The temperature was already dropping for the night.
I called a friend and he said it sounded like it was my fan.
He called a repair service and found out that the repair would be overtime whether the repairman came that night or waited until Saturday.
The charge was estimated at $300.The repairman, Steve, plugged my address into a GPS and only called for further directions after he was in my neighborhood.
He had the heat pump up and running in no time.
It was an inexpensive capacitor and not the fan so the repair came in at just a little more than $100 which pretty much equaled my windfall of a few nights before.I hope this balance theory works for health too.
My blood pressure was great, so I had high hopes that my blood work would be good news for a change too.
Every year, my numbers just keep climbing.
This year, they lowered the threshold on blood glucose levels, so that number was marked *HI.
To top it off, I had a new one crop up.
My uric acid levels were *HI also.
I know enough to know that uric acid and gout go hand-in-hand.Most, if not all, of my health problems are caused by the extra twenty pounds I'm carrying around.
Aw, but for the good old days when I was merely overweight and not (according to those new lower thresholds again) obese.
Another part of my life where I need to find balance is on my scales.Just like after last year's health fair, I am determined to lose weight and regain healthy lower numbers.
Saturday at my granddaughter's basketball game, I told my son that I was going to eat just enough to stay alive.
Of course, I had just polished off a bag of Doritos because I didn't have time to stop for lunch and the food choices were quite limited at the game."Apparently you need Doritos to stay alive," he said."I think they have to be listed with the other staples," I agreed.OK, so maybe I can't really eat just enough to stay alive and still have Doritos from time to time.
I don't believe in going to diet extremes.
In the first place, dieting makes me really cranky.
And after I work really, really hard to lose five pounds, I eat one normal meal and it's baaaaack.Experts say it's all about balance.
Eat healthy foods, exercise, and the next thing you know you look like a supermodel.My dad struggled with weight all his life.
He often said, "When you go on a diet and never eat the things you like, you may not live longer, but it sure seems like you do."Who wants to face life eating only food that is good for you and not food you crave and love?
I don't know about you, but it sure makes me want to eat a bag of Doritos.
I would only eat a small bag though because I believe in balance.
Oh, yeah, and eating only enough to stay alive.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 20, 2010>
I don't know how the athletes are holding up, but watching the Olympics is wearing me out.
I've not been to bed at a decent hour all week, and the Games have interfered with my TV routine too.
I watched the selection of the twenty-four finalists on American Idol and Men's Figure Skating at the same time.
I began to feel positively artsy with the cultural overload.This has been a glorious week for us ice skating fans.
The drama of quads versus triple jumps plus spirals, steps, footwork, and transitions determined the difference between gold and silver.
In my opinion, Evan Lysacek deserved the gold based on his overall performance.
Sure, Yevgeny Plushenko had a power-house quad, but the rest of his program was mediocre.Throughout the Olympics, athletes come to the games looking for a chance to outshine every other person competing in the same sport.
For some, it's the performance of a lifetime.
Others stumble, fall, and jump back up to finish the competition or to smile and wave at the audience to let them know they are OK.
Some athletes crave victory so much they choke and perform far below their potential.
We are surrounded by people who think one spectacular moment is more important than a lifetime of dedication to the details.
They think jumps replace steps and a moment of glory is preferable to hanging in there to get the job done.
The limelight must shine on them, or they lose interest.Last night one of the announcers talked about how some of the top skiers showed up in style with 60 pairs of skies, technical advisors, and entourages.
Bryon Wilson from Butte, Montana, in contrast, found support for his quest for an Olympic medal from hometown fundraisers like bake sales.
The point being that whether the journey is easy or hard, once you are on the downhill slope and picking up speed, your chances are the same.Those of us who have spent years advocating for a cure and effective treatment for Alzheimer's are ready to leave the practice slope and compete with the big boys.
Our journey for research funding has been a hard one--more in line with bake sales than big money and entourages.
Alzheimer's isn't a trendy disease catching the attention of media or a bevy of superstars.We are a disease represented by family members who know the pain of losing a loved one to Alzheimer's.
Sure, we have some celebrity spokespersons, and we appreciate all they do to promote awareness and help us in the battle for funding.
David Hyde Pierce is one celebrity who has made Alzheimer's awareness a personal mission.
His steadfastness is unwavering.To find funding in a tight economy takes years of persistence, dedication, and passion.
Advocates return year after year to represent the 5.3 million Americans with Alzheimer's.
Without a cure, the number of cases will triple when the baby boomers age.One sure thing--you can't compete if you don't show up for the event.
If you cannot attend the Action Summit in March, lend your voice through an email or phone call to your legislators.Tell your story and ask for their support to end this disease that steals a lifetime of memories.
Support the 600 Alzheimer's advocates who will be in Washington, DC, to compete for Alzheimer's research dollars in a down economy and against a host of financial issues.Instead of lighting an Olympic torch, we will light hundreds of candles for the Candlelight Vigil on March 8.
Our candles shine in memory of our loved ones lost to the disease and with hope for a future without Alzheimer's.
When researchers find a cure for Alzheimer's, we will cross that finish lane with arms held high in victory.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 13, 2010>
The Social Security Administration announced this week that younger onset Alzheimer's has been added to the list of conditions covered by its Compassionate Allowances Initiative.
This is good news for families with a loved one who developed dementia prior to age sixty-five.Those of us who have had family members with early onset dementia know how difficult and frustrating the system is to navigate.
Early onset means your loved one is too young to receive regular social security or Medicare.
Younger people with a disability must apply for Social Security Disability Insurance and Supplemental Security Income.
Once a disability is determined, it can take years of denial and appeals before the disabled person receives benefits.When Jim developed dementia at forty-nine, we discovered he was too young to receive many of the benefits in place to help older adults.
The only financial assistance I was able to find for respite care was the Alzheimer's Association.
They had limited funds available, but even those limited funds helped.
Jim was too young for respite funds through the Division of Aging.Fortunately, I was employed and had health insurance.
Because of my health insurance, we were able to get Jim the best treatment possible.Before this latest development, the long delay for Social Security disability left many families financially destitute.
Too often the person with dementia loses his job before being officially diagnosed.
Job performance suffers from the earliest dementia symptoms.
Loss of job could mean loss of insurance.
In addition to the emotional toll, the dire financial strain associated with younger onset Alzheimer's is overwhelming for the family.Compassionate Allowances greatly reduces the wait time before benefits take effect.
Not only will this relieve some of the financial burden of an expensive disease, it will also let people benefit from early treatment at the time when treatment is most effective.Since 2003, advocates have shared their personal stories about the hardship caused by delays in Social Security disability benefits for their loved ones.
Each year at the Alzheimer's Association Advocacy Forum in Washington, DC, we have asked for a reduction in the wait time for Social Security benefits.
Our voices were heard and the Social Security Administration hosted a public hearing in Chicago last summer to consider the validity of adding Alzheimer's to the list of diseases to be fast-tracked for benefits.Alzheimer's at any age is a difficult disease for the entire family.
In younger onset, children may still be in the home, and families have been forced to make difficult decisions.
A child's college fund may be used to provide medical or respite care for the parent with dementia.
Some families may still have to make these tough choices, but others will find adequate financial relief from Medicare and Social Security Disability benefits.Next month, the Alzheimer's Association will hold its Advocacy Forum.
Advocates will come from throughout the United States to bring awareness of how Alzheimer's impacts our future as a nation.
It is imperative that we invest in the future of our country by finding effective treatment for Alzheimer's and by taking care of those with the disease.Each year new advocates attend the forum.
Advocates are updated on current statistics, attend a candlelight vigil, and receive training on how to make the most of their time with their legislators.
We deliver packets of information to our senators and representatives, but more important than the alarming statistics is sharing our individual stories with them.Advocates give a face to the disease.
They share how devastating the disease is on a personal level.
Some advocates only participate once, but others return year after year.
This will be my tenth consecutive forum.This will be the first forum for my friend, Cindy, and my twelve-year-old granddaughter.
I took my grandson when he was twelve, and now it is my granddaughter's turn.
I have two smaller grandchildren and by the time they are twelve, they will probably have to take me.
I hope each of my grandchildren experiences being an Alzheimer's advocate.Alzheimer's Association advocates chip away at the obstacles the disease throws in life's pathway.
Alzheimer's addition to the Compassionate Allowances Initiative is a leap in the right direction.
Families dealing with early onset dementia now have one less hurtle to overcome.
Alzheimer's is a disease fraught with problems, and eliminating the long wait for Social Security Disability is a victory.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 5, 2010>
I am an Alzheimer's Ambassador and will participate in Memory Day later this month.
On this special day, hundreds of Alzheimer's advocates converge on the state capitol to discuss Alzheimer's impact on the state of Missouri.
Besides being an Alzheimer's Ambassador, I am a grassroots advocate for rural electric cooperatives.
Earlier this week, my coworker, Brenda, and I participated in the legislative conference and visited our legislators on behalf of Central Missouri Electric Cooperative.
After a breakfast meeting, we trekked up the hill to the capitol.
We took a shortcut through the Truman Building and stopped for a cup of coffee with my brother who works there.
When we moved on to the capitol, we met other advocates leaving who informed us that everyone was on the floor, so we probably wouldn't get to see our representatives.
We dropped off cards at our representative's offices and stopped at the office of Senator Delbert Scott.
"He's in his office but is headed to the floor," his legislative aide said.
The senator stopped to shake hands with us.
"Would you like to walk with me?" he asked.
"Sure," I said.
"We will do a walk and talk." We discussed cooperative issues while we walked down a flight of stairs.
When we reached the "Admittance by Invitation Only" door, he invited us in.
He pointed to a bench and told us to sit there as long as we wanted.
We wrote our names on a form, and settled in to see how the senate works.
Before long a group of oriental people came through a side door.
A distinguished looking gentleman sat next to me on the bench while several others stood behind us.
All cameras were trained in our direction.
That really made us feel special.
Brenda and I took off our coats exposing our photogenic sweaters--mine a bright blue and Brenda's a stunning tangerine.
We looked like peacocks in a room of dignified dark suits.
Senator Scott introduced Brenda and me as his special guests.
We stood to be recognized.
The senate president pro tem stood to introduce Zhou Wenzhong, Ambassador from China, who was visiting Missouri in regard to St. Louis becoming a trade hub.
The distinguished gentleman to my right stood and the Missouri version of paparazzi kept their cameras rolling.
I wanted to shake his hand, but wasn't sure about Chinese protocol and didn't want to offend him.
The senate recessed to visit the Chinese Ambassador in the lounge.
The ambassador stood to leave, but turned to me and extended his hand.
"I'm pleased to meet you," he said.
After our handshake, he shook hands with Brenda.
Another man in the group shook hands with us too.
"I don't know who you are," he said, as if he should have, "but I'm sure you are honorable people to be here." For just a moment, I was taken aback, and felt like a star-struck gate crasher.
Just by chance, Brenda and I experienced a historical moment in Missouri history.
We were on the evening news and our moment is caught on a State of Missouri archive tape.
As a friend of mine said, "You've had one minute of fame and fourteen more to go." I don't expect anything like this experience to happen again.
What are the odds that another foreign ambassador would be at the Missouri State Capitol at the exact moment I am there?
It is likely that several Alzheimer's Ambassadors will be among the hundreds of advocates visiting the state capitol on Memory Day.
Some of the ambassadors are already my friends, and I will meet more at the state capitol.
One thing is for sure, their participation in Memory Day is proof they are honorable people.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 30, 2010>
 I saw a news article that PETA wants to replace Punxsutawney Phil with a mechanical groundhog.
Call me a traditionalist, but I can't picture a mechanical groundhog heralding the onset of spring.With Groundhog Day coming up soon, my thoughts have turned to shadows.
Shadows are personal, individual and attached to us for life.
A shadow is mysterious and much more than a patch of shade.
Sometimes a shadow seems to have a life of its own.I conducted my own un-scientific experiment when I was a child.
I really thought if I moved fast enough, my shadow might not make the same motion.It does no good to run from your shadow.
It's always right behind you, touching you, taunting you.We can cast a shadow or have a shadow cast over us.
The biggest shadow in my life was when Jim developed dementia.
Sometimes I felt like burrowing into a hole and hiding from the shadow.Just like the groundhog, we have to face our real and metaphorical shadows.
When I was younger, I was always confused about how the whole shadow thing worked on Groundhog Day.
Doesn't it seem more logical that if the sun shines it is an indication of better weather?
That's not how it works though.
If the groundhog doesn't see his shadow, spring is right around the corner.I'll have to admit that I disagree with PETA on a lot of issues, but this one is just over the top.
Let's face it--the job market is limited for groundhogs, and Punxsutawney Phil has the best one of all.
If I were Phil, I'd be mad as blazes that PETA wanted to ruin the cushiest gig known to groundhogs worldwide.Life might be tough for a lot of groundhogs, but Phil is an exception.
He lives in a heated burrow and only has to show up for work one day a year.
Almost makes you wish you were a groundhog, doesn't it?All the regular groundhog's hearts must be filled with envy for Phil's so-called unethical treatment.
Maybe PETA should ask the official representative of the Groundhog Club to interview a few of the lowly groundhogs.
Since the groundhog guy understands "groundhogese" he might be able to convey their true opinion of Phil's unethical treatment.Groundhog Day is steeped in tradition and folklore, and Phil is the groundhog on the most watched list.
Come on, PETA, don't you know the whole country is on edge waiting for Phil's prediction?Did you know that 90% of the time, the groundhog sees his shadow?
I sure hope Phil doesn't see his shadow this year.
It wouldn't hurt my feelings if ice storms, blizzards, and frozen water pipes are shoved forward to next winter.There are a few things you don't do in life.
At the top of the list is "Don't mess with groundhogs".
OK, so maybe it isn't at the top of the list, but on February 2, it should be.Jim used to give a crazy laugh and in a deep voice proclaim: "The Shadow Knows!" One day when I asked him what the heck that was supposed to mean, he explained that "The Shadow Knows" was a radio show he listened to when he was a kid.
Well, just like the old radio program, the shadow knows what the weather will be.
The imposter's shadow would not be the same as Phil's, and Mother Nature would not be amused.Groundhog Clipart: Copyrighted by Bobbie Peachey http://webclipart.about.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 25, 2010>
I missed the original American Idol show where General Larry Platt performed his show-stopping "Pants on the Ground." Our pastor played the video at the beginning of his message the following Sunday and ended with a stirring rendition of his version--"Made   from the Ground."After a few Google searches, it became obvious to me that the General had become an overnight global sensation.
What was Larry Platt doing the other 62 years of his life?
He isn't called General because he was in the military--he was a general in the war against injustice.
He was a civil rights activist who was beaten on the Bloody Monday March.
He was recognized September 4, 2001, for his heroic efforts during the civil rights movement.
In other words, he was an unsung hero for the things he believed in his heart to be important.We all know these unsung heroes.
They are the people who not only support the cause they believe in, they throw heart and soul in the effort.
They brush obstacles aside with super-human strength.
I have been fortunate to know many of the unsung heroes in the battle against Alzheimer's.
I've know people with the disease who looked beyond their own tragedy and found a mission.
Tracy Mobley, diagnosed at 38, worked tirelessly on Camp Building Bridges for children whose parents have Alzheimer's or a related dementia.
Tracy pieced together a Memory Quilt in honor of people with the disease.
She's an advocate and volunteer for the Alzheimer's Association.
Caregivers are heroes too.
Karen Henley's life is focused around caring for her husband, Mike.
She doesn't seek recognition for her labor of love.
Caring for a loved one with Alzheimer's is one of the most challenging jobs a person can undertake.
Caregivers know the meaning of unconditional love.Alzheimer's staff and volunteers are the rank and file soldiers.
Alzheimer's staff shares their expertise with the volunteers to increase the size of the army.
Penny Braun began her work with the Alzheimer's Association as a volunteer.
She went on to become the first executive director of the Mid-Missouri Chapter.
She turned a one-person office into a fully staffed dynamic entity serving 29 Missouri counties.
Penny is a hero in the war against Alzheimer's.Volunteers make up the largest force in any organization.
When it comes to Alzheimer's volunteers, I think of Ted Distler's smiling face.
For many years, Ted has motivated, prodded, and led hundreds of people into being involved in Memory Walk.
Ted works tirelessly to support other caregivers and to share his experiences and knowledge with his community.
If good works ever went viral like the catchy tune and words of "Pants on the Ground" these special people and millions of other motivated volunteers would become household names.
The General himself said that he hoped "Pants on the Ground" didn't overshadow his civil rights work.
That makes the General a pretty smart man as far as I'm concerned.
Instant fame didn't make him forget that life isn't just one shining moment, it involves years of plugging away at the causes you believe in.
I hope General Larry Platt's inspiration to the world isn't just the tune, but the man singing it.
Otherwise, the pants on the ground merely drag out our tracks and erase the footprints of our legacy.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 16, 2010>
For the past three days fog has thrown a gloomy blanket over my world.
I can't see the sun, but, by golly, I know it's there.The haze is depressing and has awakened a philosophical streak in me.
It reminds me of the fog that cast a net over us when Jim was diagnosed with "an Alzheimer's type of dementia."During that dark time, determination and faith became the saving grace that kept the fog at bay.
The knowledge that no one had defeated Alzheimer's left us crushed beneath the miasma that took our breath away.Fog makes me uncomfortable, and I feel threatened when driving with limited visibility.
The only way to see the road is to dim the lights and cast them downward.
If you leave the lights on bright, swirling grey clouds make you dizzy and you can't see a safe distance ahead.I've battled with fog a few times, and one night I thought the fog was going to win.
I left the nursing home after spending time with Jim, headed for my son's house.
I took a shortcut to the highway on a narrow blacktop road and hit a spot where dense fog obstructed my view.
When I could no longer see the pavement, I stopped and hoped I wasn't parked in the middle of the highway.I called Eric and told him I wasn't sure where I was and couldn't see anything.
"I'm afraid a car will come along and hit me," I said.
I was beyond worried--I was scared and headed toward panic."Just stay put for a while and it will lift," he said.
"If the fog is so thick you can't see anything, no one else will be moving either."Unfortunately, I never had much confidence in every driver having common sense.
Time seemed to stand still while I waited for the fog to lift.
I looked at a solid wall of grey, my stomach tied in knots.Eventually, the fog cleared, and I resumed the journey to my son's house.
After my visit, I was apprehensive about driving home.
Eric got in his truck and led the way.
Following his taillights was reassuring, and the fog didn't seem to be so scary.Life can leave us feeling like we are all alone and lost in a fog.
Alzheimer's can seem like a solid wall blocking our path.When circumstances bring us to a complete halt, we need to pause, take a few deep breaths to stave off the panic attack, and have faith the fog will lift.
The darkness will end and the sun will burn through the haze.Fog's life is limited, but the sun always shines.
Fog may obscure the reassuring sunlight, but at the perfect moment golden rays will burst forth in all its glory.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 9, 2010>
Old Man Winter has hit with a vengeance and sub-zero temperatures make life hazardous for all of us.
Our entire country has been hit with record-breaking lows.Caregivers must be vigilant to keep their loved ones with Alzheimer's safe.
My heart goes out to the caregiver in Nashville who put her 81-year-old husband to bed Sunday night and woke up to discover he had wandered outside.
His frozen body was found in his own yard the next morning.Here in the Midwest, our Christmas snow is still on the ground and added to on a regular basis.
This winter wonderland is starting to inconvenience me.
Our roads were graded to a thin layer of ice, and I drove the scenic, long route to work each morning to avoid the hill to west of my house.The first time I had to drive on slick roads this year, snow whipped onto my windshield and the wind shaped snow into tall drifts that threatened to block the roads.
I didn't meet any cars and I figured there was a good reason they stayed home.While I negotiated the slick roads, I thought about how competent and confident Jim was on snow and ice.
When he was in the early stages of dementia, I still trusted him more than I trusted myself on the slick roads.
I never had to drive on it until he could no longer drive.My hands shook by the time I pulled into my garage, but the trip had gone without incident.
Jim taught me well.
I do know how to drive on bad roads.
I know it is important to keep up momentum without driving too fast or too slow.
It irritates me to be on a slick highway and have people whizzing around me in their pickups and SUVs going ten miles over the speed limit.
They are not just flirting with disaster--they throw slush on my windshield.
Wednesday morning a winter storm warning was in effect.
I packed my duffle bag with clothing and other essentials in case I couldn't get home after work.
It's hard to know when meteorologists will get the forecast right, but it doesn't take much snow and wind to blow giant drifts across our roads.My mom called and asked me, "Are you snowed in?""Nope, I'm snowed out," I said.I spent two nights at Best Western.
I'm not used to cleaning off my car in the mornings and misjudged just how long it takes.
The inconvenience of cleaning my car was certainly much better than being stuck in a snowdrift.
When I got word that the snowplows had made it down our road, I came home last night.
My brother-in-law, Terry, used the snow shovel to clear my driveway so I could get my car into the garage.
Staying at the hotel was nice, but it sure feels good to be home.Looking out my window, the pristine snowy scene is worthy of a Currier and Ives Christmas card.
Instead of just enjoying it, I'm thinking of the inconvenience.
Can I drive safely on the roads?
Should I just relax and spend the day at home?
Winter wonderland, beautiful to view, but not so great for driving.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 3, 2010>
I hardly ever stay awake to welcome in the New Year, but I did this year.
Of course, the only reason for me to watch TV until midnight is to witness the ball drop in New York City.
Dick Clark, known for years as America's oldest teenager, looked amazingly handsome, but his slow, measured speech was hard to understand.Dick Clark's faltering words reminded me of the changes in Jim's speech when dementia caused him to develop aphasia.
Jim's hesitant speech was filled with repetitive phrases and eventually turned into silence.
Late in the disease, it was hard to remember the days of intriguing conversations and shared jokes.Dick Clark's impaired speech was caused by a stroke in 2004.
Eighty-year-old Clark has made an amazing recovery."They were debating on TV this morning about whether it is really a new decade," my friend said."I'm no mathematician, but I can tell you that the decade will start next year," I replied.I learned the lesson of time from a Trivial Pursuit game years ago.
The question: What date is the first day of the 21st century?
I didn't even need to think about it--I had always puzzled over why the years started with 19, but the show on TV was "The Twentieth Century." I thought the trick was that the 2000s were the 21st century."January 1, 2000," I said."Wrong," my brother-in-law Dennis replied.
"January 1, 2001." After a lengthy discussion, we decided the card was a misprint.
After all, Henry Salveter, our cooperative attorney at the time and one of the smartest men I ever knew, always said he was born the last day of the last month of the last century and his birthday was December 31, 1899.Later that night, I lay in bed thinking about it and suddenly realized the card was correct.
When time began, the first year would begin at 0 and twelve months later would be 1.
In grammar school we all learned that 101-1=100.
Lo, and behold, the new century would begin in 2001.I discussed the turn of the century, before it happened, with my brother Mitchell.
He mulled it over in his logical way and asked me, "When do you think the parties will be?"During the countdown to 2010, I noticed Dick Clark missed a few numbers, repeated a few, but was back on track by the time the ball dropped and he said, "Welcome to the new decade."Technically, it's not a new decade, but logically, you would not say welcome to the decade of 2011-2021, would you?
It doesn't really matter what happened between years 0-10.If Henry Salveter knew that 1900 began a new century, and Dick Clark says that 2010 is a new decade, it's good enough for me.It is best if we use our hearts to define time.
The decades we've lived through are our past and what makes us who we are.
The decades in the future define who we will become.
But in the grand scheme of things, it is today that is most important.Happy New Year and have a great decade.
And, hey, if 2010 doesn't work out for you--just start your new decade next year.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 27, 2009>
There has to be a scientific explanation why time goes by faster as we grow older.
Maybe we just gain momentum and pick up speed as we race through life.Another year is almost gone, and we individually and collectively reflect on it.
TV tributes abound for famous people who died this year: Michael, Farrah, Bea, Eunice, Ted, Walter, Soupy...  Everyone that touches our lives becomes part of us.
Sometimes we take celebrity deaths personally, but grief over a superstar is only a fraction of what we feel when something happens to loved ones in our inner circle.When I was a primary caregiver, the days felt like they had too many waking hours and not nearly enough sleeping hours.
Yet, I wanted to grab time and slow it down.
Time was the enemy during Jim's slow, steady decline into the land of dementia.Like it or not, our world changes every day.
My son told me a few nights ago that I should get a texting plan for my cell phone.
I do something really weird with my cell phone--I talk on it.
I believe a conspiracy is afoot to force me to get with the program.
I haven't had this much pressure since the kids were embarrassed about the dial telephone hanging on the kitchen wall.My phone has been out since Christmas day, but I have my cell phone to keep me from feeling cut off from the world.
I don't have Internet because I'm on dialup.
I can live without checking my email, commenting on Facebook, or even posting my blog.
It's an inconvenience, but I'm not losing any sleep over it.Our changing world has made us dependent on the World Wide Web.
How did people find destinations before GPS systems or Google Map?
It is eerie to plug in an address and see images of your house on the screen.
Well, they haven't mapped out here in the boonies where I live, but my son's house is not only pictured, you can see their mower kicking up grass clippings.
You can become a little figure and walk through the neighborhood.My granddaughter was playing with Goggle Map and found herself in Hawaii.
"Can you find Fort DeRussy Chapel?" I asked.
We walked through the surrounding neighborhood, and I saw a lot of familiar landmarks--including the Ilikai where Jim and I spent our honeymoon.Maybe we should all just become virtual tourists.
Think of how much stress, strain, time, and money we could save.
I get emails daily about upcoming net meetings.
People work from home, and come Monday, I'm going to be mighty jealous of them.Embracing change and moving forward is the secret to a happy and productive life.
We can't live in the past, but the past lives in us.We each produce, direct, and star in our own reality show.
We faithfully tune in each day to experience the next installment.
Life, like any good show builds on the previous episodes making the plot more intricate.
Characters worm their way into our lives, and we love them just as they are.
Once we accept their flaws, we find them endearing.When we wrap up the past, we open endless possibilities for an unfolding future where adventure waits to happen.
In life, we can't fast forward through the bad parts or play the good times in slow motion.
We should grasp each moment, and live it to the fullest.
I don't know about you, but I'm looking forward to the New Year just as eagerly as ever.
I hope your reality is filled with health, happiness, and love.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 20, 2009>
If I hadn't been so busy the week leading up to our family get-together, I would have been better prepared.
I spent my day off this week writing articles about Alzheimer's, so my "to-do" list turned into the "didn't-get-done" list.Saturday, I woke up at 6:30 with the idea of getting an early start.
My philosophy turned into what gets done is done, and what doesn't just will not happen this year.
While I jumpstarted myself with coffee, my daughter-in-law made biscuits and gravy for breakfast.My granddaughter stayed with me while the rest of the family went to town.
I wrapped presents behind closed doors and handed her gifts to place beneath the tree.
I vacuumed and worked on laundry.
My granddaughter helped me fold clothes, sort through paper plates, and bring up more decorations from the basement.
"Grandma Linda, you sure have a lot of stuff down here," she said.
She read from labels on plastic storage boxes, "Here's Thanksgiving, St. Patrick's Day, and more Christmas."The day flew by, but when the rest of the family arrived everything was ready.
My youngest granddaughter was Santa's helper and distributed gifts.
My four grandchildren range in age from 2 to 15, and have a variety of interests.
The older two prefer doing their own shopping so it made more sense to give them pre-paid credit cards.
Santa's helper prefers Barbie dolls and princesses.
My youngest grandson likes trucks and cars.In the midst of tearing Christmas paper and prying gifts out of the packaging, shiny pieces of foil flew from the Peter Pan book and sprinkled the carpet.
"Ooops!
Glitter is all over the floor!" my niece said."That's not glitter, that's fairy dust," I replied.
"Cathy Rigby put it inside the book when she signed it."Cameras flashed as we captured moments--revving up Monster Trucks to jump Matchbox cars and assembling the Barbie TV Cooking Show set.
It's hard to believe that Barbie can cook in those high heels and wearing that mini skirt.After we--I mean the kids--played with their toys for a while, everyone began to gather up paper, boxes, and debris scattered throughout the house.
A heroic attempt was made to scoop up the fairy dust, but it was everywhere so I volunteered to vacuum later.Considering the chaos yesterday, everything is remarkably back in order.
I have a lot of leftovers, but microwaved biscuits and gravy hit the spot.After church this morning, I switched on the fiber-optic tree, put my feet up and read the paper.
I haven't vacuumed yet, and fairy dust winks at me from the carpet.
Yesterday my house was filled with love and laughter.
Today is silent, peaceful, and a time to reflect on all the magic that has graced my life.With family time behind me, Christmas seems to be over.
The bright sparkle of fairy dust and the lighted tree remind me that Christmas isn't just a "holiday season"--it's a way of life.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 13, 2009>
We watched Momentum in Science Part II at our last support group meeting.
When a new person entered the room and introduced herself, she said, "My dad is in the film." She didn't know if he was in the segment we were going to watch.
I sat close to her and ask her to let us know if he was in this segment.
Toward the end, she said, "That's my dad."I had watched the entire HBO Project before, but picked up more information from the second viewing.
An interesting chapter in this part was the DeMoe family story.
Six siblings are being studied to try to learn more about familial early-onset Alzheimer's.
Out of the six, only Karla does not have the gene that will cause the type of Alzheimer's that ended their father's life at age 58.
My heart ached for the five with the disease, but the saddest person was Karla.
She has taken on responsibility for her brothers and sisters and already misses them as they spiral into the Alzheimer's abyss.Researchers believe they can find more effective treatments and possibly an immunization.
The immunization trial was put on hold after some of those studied developed encephalitis.
Immunization showed promise.
It did a marvelous job of removing plaque,  one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer's.When we think about diseases that have been eradicated by immunization, it would seem this would be the best case scenario for Alzheimer's.
It would certainly mean a life-changing difference for families like the DeMoe's who have a new generation with a 50/50 chance of developing Alzheimer's.Dementia is devastating for the entire family.
Karla is as much a victim of Alzheimer's as her siblings.
She is more aware of their personality erosion than they are.
Her siblings will make peace with the disease, but Karla has already begun to grieve their losses.Each person with dementia is an individual whose life has been decimated.
The effects of Alzheimer's types of dementia explodes outward with the power of a bomb blast and attempts to destroy the lives of those closest to ground zero.My life was forever changed with Jim's dementia.
And as heart wrenching as Jim's disease was for me, I think about the DeMoes and my friend Karen Henley whose husband Mike has familial Alzheimer's.
Karen's life has been forever changed by her husband's illness, and she must carry a burden in her heart for the possibility that her children may not be safe from the same disease.
How much lighter would her burden be if an immunization could protect her children?During discussion following the screening, we talked about some of the people who had taken part in experimental treatments.
The immunization study consisted of giving several small doses of the drug.
One woman whose husband received the injections said, "People kept asking how he was and we would say he is holding." Holding is about as good as it gets with Alzheimer's.
The couple was disappointed and angry when the treatment ended.Jim was on an experimental drug.
I asked my sons for their opinion before enrolling Jim in the Phase III trial.
My youngest son said, "Dad would be the first person to want to try it."  Jim was on the drug several months, but it had too many side effects and was never approved."My dad has changed so much since the film was made," our guest at support group said.
"He is frailer now." I knew what she meant.
Over the ten years Jim had the disease, his physical appearance changed dramatically.Families like the DeMoes and Henleys are in the minority.
Most people do not know the reality of living with dementia until it strikes their family.
Jim was the first and, thankfully so far, the only person in his family to develop the rare form of dementia he had.According to the film, Alzheimer's is the second most dreaded disease after cancer.
More than five million Americans have Alzheimer's and the number of cases is expected to double every twenty years.
Researchers are exploring many promising avenues, and work diligently toward changing Alzheimer's from a hopeless disease to a manageable one.
***For information about drug trials or to become Alzheimer's advocate visit www.alz.org.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 6, 2009>
Tuesday was my first day at work after a week's vacation.
When I opened my mail, I saw an advertisement that Senator Jean Carnahan would be at Sedalia Book and Toy to sign The Tide Always Comes Back.
I had met her during my annual pilgrimages to Washington DC for the Alzheimer's Association.On the drive to the bookstore, I scolded myself for giving in to temptation.
Hadn't I spent several hours cataloging more than 250 books in my home library the day before?
Didn't dozens of unread books sit on my shelves?
No amount of mental chastisement kept me from being one of the first people in line to buy the former Missouri senator's book.Jean became an accidental senator when her husband was elected to that office posthumously.
Taking office so soon after her husband's death in a plane crash, Jean jumped into the challenge of representing her state and didn't dwell on widowhood.
In The Tide Always Comes Back she wrote: "Sure, I've checked those marital status boxes on printed forms, but I have never thought of myself as a widow in the traditional sense.
For so long, society has identified widows as poor, sniveling souls unable to face the world."I read this passage to Brenda, a co-worker who was recently widowed.
"I just filled out a form at the doctor's office and wondered why they needed to know that I was a widow.
I almost didn't mark the box," she said.The average widow is fifty-five years old and remains a widow for fourteen years.
Seven hundred thousand women are widowed each year.
At one time widowhood was a way of life, but modern women do not wear black for a year and enter into a dignified state of mourning.
The truth is most widows are back on the job shortly after the funeral.
We see strong women reel, fall to their knees, and then bounce back at astonishing speed.Many people read my blog and do not realize I am a widow.
I interject stories about Jim and caregiving so that others may benefit from our experiences.
When I think of widows, I remember Jim's reaction after his Aunt Mary, and then his mother, were widowed.
"I think widows are secret gadabouts," he said.
His theory was reinforced when my mother was widowed a few months later.Not long ago, my mom and Aunt Labetta dropped by work to visit me.
Aunt Labetta put her arms on our shoulders and said, "Here we are--three widows." It's strange to think of myself as a widow and it's not easy to identify either of those two active, laughing women as widows.
They travel, occasionally make a run to the casino, and play guitars together.I don't know any traditional widows.
The widows I know are resilient and unafraid of life.
Often, death of a loved one reinforces the importance of living life to the fullest.
Marriage that lasts until "death do us part" leaves a sense of fulfillment.The years Jim and I spent together will always be a major part of me.
The give and take of marriage, the ups and downs, and Jim's devastating dementia have shaped my personality and endowed me with a life's mission.
I do not write about Jim and the life of a caregiver due to unrelenting grief.
Writing about life helps me heal and gives me hope that my future is full of adventure, excitement, accomplishment, and love.The traditional widow is a stereotype.
Like Senator Carnahan, I do not think of myself as a widow.
I think of myself as a woman who was fortunate enough to have enjoyed enduring love, suffered great loss, and rebounded to a full rich life.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 28, 2009>
Black Friday is theoretically the biggest shopping day of the year, but I did my share of helping the economy during my Branson trip.
Friday, I slept late and spent the day leisurely dragging out my Christmas decorations.
I usually start with my Old World Santas, but this year began with the nutcrackers instead.
With careful arrangement, most of the nutcrackers fit on the shelf above my entertainment center.It was a beautiful day and ideal weather to string the lights on the back deck.
Last year, the day of our family get-together, a friend and I wound the lights around the railing wearing gloves and heavy coats.Once the tree was up and the fiber optic bear lit, it was time to relax with a spot of tea and flip the switch for the lights.
I'm still a far cry from the Griswolds, but this as glowing as lights get around my house.It's not like me to decorate for Christmas this early, but for some reason, I was compelled to begin on Black Friday.
I've enjoyed a leisurely vacation this week staying close to home.
I worked on my manuscript, but didn't push it too much and opted for some much needed downtime.Several years ago, we de-stressed Christmas by changing our tradition.
When we have our family gathering, each adult brings an inexpensive gift to exchange.
I buy educational CDs for my grandchildren and a few small gifts.When I was unloading the Christmas totes yesterday, it was bittersweet.
I found the tiny Christmas tree I used to put in Jim's room at the nursing home.
I came across a framed snapshot I always set out during the holidays.
It is a picture of Jim, me and our oldest grandson sitting on the living room floor in front of the Christmas tree.
Jim is wearing his denim jacket, Vietnam Veteran's cap, and dark sunglasses.
The picture is not dated, but this outfit was his hallmark of early dementia.One year, when I put photographs in a box to clear the shelves for decorations, Jim took them out of the box and set them back on the shelf.
He didn't want me to change things, he wanted familiar family pictures.Pictures freeze a small moment in time.
Can I remember what I was thinking at the moment the camera snapped?
Maybe not, but the look we share is filled with love and happiness.This will be my fifth Christmas without Jim.
Christmas is probably the hardest holiday for people who have lost a loved one.
From childhood we build high expectations of what Christmas should be and are disappointed when it doesn't reach the level we anticipated.
Once we understand that the greatest gifts are not wrapped in shiny paper and topped with bows, we are free to celebrate the real gifts in life.This year, I look forward to the holiday season with an inner peace and joyfulness I haven't felt for a long time.
My joy has nothing to do with shopping, buying or receiving presents.
It has to do with family and friends, to love and be loved.A picture perfect Christmas needs snow and glistening trees.
One Christmas refrain is, "Let it snow!" A heart perfect Christmas needs love and hope.
When I flip the switch and the house is aglow with Christmas lights, my expectation is that the brightest glow will be in my heart and on my face.Here's to wishing your holiday refrain will be "Let it glow!"
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 23, 2009>
Last weekend evolved into a whirlwind of shows and shopping.
A girls' weekend--friends spending time together in Branson.Visiting Branson and Silver Dollar City is a metamorphic experience for a native Missourian.
Our little moth has changed into a glitzy butterfly, and the razzle-dazzle masks the charm of small town Branson.
When I was a student at Hard Work U, Branson had a four way stop and two or three small country music theatres.
Dick's Five and Dime was there, but instead of being a tourist attraction, it was just a place where you could buy inexpensive items.Silver Dollar City has changed from a small local attraction with a train ride, the Fire in the Hole and a few pickers and grinners to an extravaganza of professional shows, thrill rides, lights in every tree, bush, hollow, building, structure, and a five story Christmas tree--four million lights in all.Branson is always bittersweet for me because Jim and I spent a lot of time there, especially when his dementia made our trips to Colorado much harder.
Being a musician himself, Jim loved the music shows.
His favorite performer was Tom Brumley and the highlight of each Branson trip.
We had season passes to Silver Dollar City and enjoyed taking our grandson with us when he was little.
I'll never forget the weekend when he and Jim went into the restroom and I waited and worried about what was taking them so long.
While I vigilantly guarded the door, they walked up behind me.
They had exited on the other side of the building and my four-year-old grandson led his grandpa back to me.I have more memories of Silver Dollar City and Branson than they have Christmas lights.
This weekend, I added to those memories.
The production of A Dickens' Christmas Carol was performed by a talented troupe that would have done Broadway proud.
As if that wasn't enough, my friends and I experienced Cathy Rigby as Peter Pan.
The show had so much magic that we all went home with pockets full of fairy dust and determination to never grow up.Branson and Silver Dollar City have both become unrecognizable--different, but still hold the magic of a lifetime of memories.
Where my dad used to fish is now a multi-million dollar shopping area known as The Landing.
Streetscaping with gaslights, fountains, Christmas lights, old fashioned trolleys and street performers give it the look and feel of other upscale "old town" shopping centers scattered throughout the United States.I'm sure a lot of tourists feel like they've taken a step back in time when they visit Branson.
Sometimes I feel like I've leapt into the future and don't really know this place at all.
Branson is like a rock star with countless facelifts to deliberately remove the flaws and accidentally erase the character that made it unique.The hills don't look anything like they did forty years ago, but then neither do I.
Everything changes.
How we react to those changes determine whether we continue to enjoy life or groan about the "good ole days." I don't know about you, but I intend to find as much joy as I can while I pass through this world.Branson is most definitely filled with entertainment choices and great places to eat.
Even with my determination to be flexible, I'll admit that slow moving traffic, elbow to elbow shopping, and trolling for a parking space is annoying.
Spending time with friends and enjoying world class entertainment adds to my treasure trove of happy memories.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 13, 2009>
In the past few weeks, I've had the opportunity to attend some outstanding Alzheimer's training.
I also read two good books about dementia.In late October, I went to the Alzheimer's Association Heart of America's Train the Trainer, Building Creative Caregivers.
Last Friday I went to the Mid-Missouri Chapter's program on genetic studies.
No matter how much I learn about Alzheimer's, I pick up new information at each program I attend and from each book I read.At the Building Creative Caregivers training session, I received a thick workbook.
As I began to read through the details of all the modules, I came across reference to The Best Friends Approach to Alzheimer's Care by Virginia Bell and David Troxel.
The book goes hand in hand with the "Person First" module in the Train the Trainer manual.I sat on my porch this afternoon reading the book.
I found "An Alzheimer's Disease Bill of Rights" to be a logical set of guidelines.
In the detail, for "To be free from psychotropic drugs, if possible" I saw the statement: Hugs are usually better than drugs.
I wholeheartedly agree with that statement.The Best Friends Approach is written with professional caregivers in mind.
It is a way to provide care based on meeting the psychological as well as physical needs of a person who has been diagnosed with dementia.
Family caregivers know the history and preferences of their loved one, but when professionals treat everyone the same, they are denying our individual natures and preferences.It is important to minister to the soul and spirit as well as the physical needs when a person faces the challenges of dementia.
Bell and Troxel liken Alzheimer's disease to a long trip in a foreign land where we can't speak the language, know the customs, or understand how to use the phone.When caring for a person with dementia we must concentrate on what they can do rather than what they cannot do.
Can they still enjoy a walk?
A drive?
A cup of coffee where they can watch birds gather at a feeder?
Jim was a musician and never lost his love of country music.
He had a personal tape player with headphones.
When the tape ended, Jim had to rely on someone else to turn the tape and play the other side.
How easy would it be now to fill an IPod with someone's favorite music?At the Mid-Missouri program this week, one of the staff members asked me if I had read Still Alice.
She told me she had just finished the book and thought it was excellent.
I bought the book from Lisa Genova last March at the Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum.
I had heard a lot about the book, but when I realized Genova based the fictional story on her research of early onset Alzheimer's rather than personal experience, I figured it was another glamorized story about Alzheimer's with no basis on reality.I read Still Alice in a few days.
Genova makes Alice seem like a real person and you can feel Alice's confusion and grief as the disease brings an end to her familiar life.
The journey for Alice and her family are realistic.
The conflicts between love and loss, selfishness and generosity, denial and acceptance have been experienced by millions of families when they realize their loved one cannot be cured.Yes, the past few weeks have been filled with learning.
Last night at support group, we showed "Momentum in Science Part I" from the HBO Alzheimer's Project.
Although I had watched the film before, I learned from it.
It was interesting to see the relationship between brain disease and overall health.Much has been learned about Alzheimer's disease, but so much of it is still a mystery.
As scientists seek effective treatment, we must provide the best care possible for those who have the disease now.
With a best friends approach, we can provide person first care to improve quality of life whether a person lives at home or in a long-term care facility.Hugs are indeed better than drugs and a lot less expensive.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 7, 2009>
Turtles, our slow-natured friends, are the beneficiaries of a government sponsored windfall.
Plans are afoot to provide a $3 million tunnel for Florida turtles to allow safe passage beneath the busy highway.We wouldn't want turtles to be hit by cars and become unwilling missiles.
Does the so-called expert that says this happens think turtles are a top-secret weapon of mass destruction?I will admit that living in rural Missouri, I've run over my share of turtles.
I've seen others that met with a sad fate while simply trying to cross a country road or state highway.I hate to hit a turtle.
I've never seen one become a missile, but I've certainly heard the sickening "plop" as the shell crunches.
It makes me feel bad to know I've unwittingly killed a living creature.
Sometimes, I'm lucky and straddle the little slowpokes and spare their lives.
Other times, we are both unlucky.Jim created his own turtle/terrapin crossings.
When he spotted one of the little fellows in the road, he stopped the car, got out, and carried the docile creature across the road.
Hopefully, he saved as many lives as I took with my carelessness.One day my son had hitched a ride home from school with one of his buddies.
They saw a turtle in the road, and Eric told his friend that his dad helped them across the road so they wouldn't get hit by a car.
Eric's friend was so inspired by the story, he pulled over and jumped out of his vehicle.
As he reached for the turtle, instead of hiding in his shell, the turtle viciously snapped at the hand that was trying to save him.
All turtles are not created equal in the humble department and the Good Samaritan has the scars to prove it.Just think how long the crossing takes when the turtle stops and pulls in all appendages and sits there all snug inside his shell thinking he is safe.
Instead of the shell providing a safe haven, it just means he is in harm's way longer.It's easy for us to see that the turtle is in denial of the danger lurking around the next corner.
We understand denial because it is an all too human emotion.I heard a story of denial at lunch yesterday.
A group of us attended a luncheon prior to an educational program about the genetic studies being done on Alzheimer's disease.
I sat next to a nurse who provides counseling for families dealing with Alzheimer's.
She mentioned her own denial when her mother first displayed symptoms of dementia.
Logically, she knew her mother's behavior couldn't be explained away, but emotionally, she grasped at hope born from denial.When you are in denial, you are inside the shell with the turtle.
It makes the world feel safer, but it can put you and your loved one in harm's way.
While you are in denial, a family member with dementia may continue to drive when they shouldn't.
You may leave for a few hours and return to an empty house because your loved one has wandered.
Your denial makes you a turtle in the middle of the road with a speeding car fast approaching.Wouldn't we like to keep our loved ones safe?
I'm sure that if $3 million would keep our families safe, we would be willing to pay it if we had it.
The key word is "if".
A certain faction of our society thinks no amount of money is too much to keep the world safe for small critters, but don't worry about how the money is being taken away from our fellow humans.
How much safer could the highway be made with $3 million?
How many human lives could be saved with the money used to "protect" turtles?The problem is turtles cannot be kept safe by a tunnel.
Perhaps the turtles will be safe while they are in the tunnel, but the big dangerous world exists on both sides.
No amount of taxpayer's money will keep the turtles safe.
No living creature lives in a vacuum and no tunnel could be big enough or long enough to protect life except for a fleeting moment.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 31, 2009>
Don't you just wish they (whoever they are) would leave the time alone?
Since I get up so early, I prefer standard time.
Psychologically speaking the lighter the sky when I leave for work, the more awake I feel.The best thing about the time change is the extra hour we have between Saturday night and Sunday morning.
Have you ever thought about how much difference an hour can make?
For some reason I can't stop thinking about it.
An hour can be the difference between life and death.If I had not been in the exact place at the exact time I would not have met Jim on that summer Saturday in 1968.
An hour would have changed my entire life and the lives of my children and grandchildren.It's easy to fritter away an hour here and an hour there.
Most of the time an hour is insignificant but at other times it can come at a high price.
When you miss a deadline by one measly hour, you can lose your job.
If you don't spend an hour studying for a test, you could fail a class.
If a flight is delayed one hour, you can miss a connecting flight, which can cause you to miss an important meeting.
An hour can be the difference between owning a home and seeing it reduced to smoldering ashes.An hour can seem like an eternity if a loved one is missing, When Jim wandered off, minutes seemed like hours while we searched for him.
The locale was different, but the heart-stopping fear was the same whether he was on our own road, lost in an airport, wandering around the mall, or lost in a crowd at Silver Dollar City.
An hour can be the difference between a safe return and a tragic outcome.Some surgeries only take an hour.
I had an obstinate gallbladder removed in an hour.
That hour meant living my life without painful attacks.An hour can be for good or for evil.
It can make a life changing difference or be of no consequence at all.
When you think back over the last week, can you recall one single hour in detail?
Can you think of an hour you would take back and erase if you could?Those of us with fulltime jobs work 2080 hours per year.
Our work day sometimes seems to be made up of slow moving hours.
Of course we need to deduct vacation and holidays.
When we are involved in a hobby or favorite activity, an hour speeds past on amazingly fleet feet.Our lives are made up of hours.
Those hours meld into weeks, months, years and become a lifetime.
In the final hour, we learn the true meaninglessness of time.We gain our hour tonight while most of us are in bed asleep.
An extra hour can be the difference between being well rested or suffering sleep deprivation.
It can be the difference between a dream and a nightmare.But tonight, the time changes and we gain an hour.
Have you thought about how to spend that precious extra hour?
I don't know what you plan to do with that bonus hour, but I plan to be sleeping.
Soundly.
Dreaming sweet dreams.
Banking the hour for next spring when they (whoever they are) take it away and we lose an hour.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 25, 2009>
I've been pushing myself a lot lately and can't find enough hours in the day to get everything done.
This morning I basked in a few rare hours of downtime and watched ice skating on TV.
Ladies figure skating has long been my favorite sport, and I can't help but be amazed at the discipline and talent that goes into each performance.
Part of my admiration stems from an inability to even walk on ice.
A few years ago my feet swooshed out from under me causing me to fall flat on my back and crack my head on a surface as hard as concrete.Many years ago I talked Jim into taking me to St. Louis to see Stars on Ice.
At the time, Jim was in the early stages and we were hopeful his problems were caused by something treatable like depression or a vitamin deficiency.
The trip went smoothly except when Jim drove the wrong way on a one-way street.
That could happen to anyone in the confusing downtown area of St. Louis.We checked into a hotel overlooking the river area and within sight of the Arch.
Our room was nice, but the bed had only two pillows, exactly Jim's requirement.
He called the front desk and said, "My wife doesn't have a pillow." It was obvious he had claimed both pillows and decided I didn't have any.The next year we went to Stars on Ice in Kansas City.
As we approached Kemper Arena            we were directed into a small parking lot tucked between tall buildings.
We couldn't see the arena because of the buildings crowding all sides of the lot but found it by following the crowd headed to the show.The very air feels different at a live skating show.
On TV it's easy to be critical when the performance isn't perfect.
At a live performance, the amazing talent of professional skaters shines in a different light.
A death spiral seems much scarier in person.
The man spins at great speed, swinging his partner around and around, up and down, until you shut your eyes because it looks like he will surely slam her head into the ice.
You see the "air" beneath the jumps and wonder how a human can develop such skill.
Yes, to be at a live ice skating event, you realize that a great skater may not always skate perfectly.We were still hyped from the show when we exited the building.
We realized we had no idea where our car was parked.
Jim had always had a great sense of direction and I depended on him.
The January night was frigid and the crowd thinned as everyone hurried to their cars.
My stomach hurt when I realized it was going to be up to me to figure out where we were parked."We need to go to the other side of the arena," I told Jim.
We walked around Kemper and saw a sidewalk headed toward some buildings.
"It has to be down this way, don't you think?""I have no idea," Jim said.
Boy, were we ever in trouble."I know it's this way," I said with more confidence than I felt.
We walked toward the dimly lighted buildings.
After a few blocks on the deserted sidewalk we veered down a dark alley.
Our car was the only vehicle left in the lot.It's been years since I've watched a live skating show and found this morning's televised skating performances disappointing.
The skaters fell, popped jumps, or made two-footed landings.Then, I thought about the pressure on skaters now.
Skaters must execute perfect triple or quadruple jumps to be competitive.
A champion skater cannot remain in a comfort zone, but must take risks.
As a result, skaters make multiple mistakes or miscalculations.
When I remember Scott Hamilton executing a perfect back flip, it is unimportant if he fell from time to time or popped a jump.In a perfect world we wouldn't falter or fall.
But it isn't a perfect world and we are only human.
If we never stretch ourselves, we may not fail, but we won't know the joy of living our dreams.
We can stay in our comfort zone and settle for mediocrity, or take a risk and push ourselves to the limit.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 17, 2009>
In celebration of the impending Halloween season, I decided to read something really scary, so I pulled out my prescription fact sheets.
My insurance provider refers to the full page, single-spaced, ten-point font sheet as "Participant Counseling."The older I get, the more drugs I have added to my arsenal.
My health insurance company strongly encourages annual health screenings.
Because of this annual testing, it has been easy for my doctor to following my escalating numbers.
I'll admit that he has been cautious about prescribing the maintenance drugs for my accumulating conditions.
The preferred line of action was to lose weight, but it seems like I lose the same five pounds over and over.One of my prescriptions has side effects of dizziness, headache, nausea, gas, stomach upset/pain, diarrhea and constipation (not at the same time, I hope).Those are the minor side effects.
My participant counseling sheet for my cholesterol drug has a large section under "caution" which tells me I might have muscle pain or muscle damage which could lead to kidney damage and "a very serious condition" rhabdocmyolysis.
I don't know what that is, but I betcha I don't want it.Another interesting part is when the sheet counsels me to not take the medication if I am allergic to any of the ingredients in the product.
I am not a chemist and most of the "ingredients" don't look like anything I've ever knowingly taken.Lately I've noticed that television commercials for prescription drugs show active people playing tennis, bike riding, or participating in other activities that make me tired just to watch.
The voice over extols the benefits of a prescription for about the first quarter of the commercial.
For the remainder of the commercial, a predictable pattern has emerged.
A rapid fire voice describes the side-effects and in a slower, soothing tone finishes up with "ask your physician if (fill in the blank) is right for you." Did I hear something about "sudden death" in that quick disclaimer?
It makes me wonder how important a prescription is if it's supposed to make you happy, healthy and active, but "oh, by the way" it might cause stroke, cardiac arrest, or liver failure.One night I was taking my medication and my six-year-old granddaughter asked "What do those pills do, Grandma Linda?"I looked at the handful of pills and started pointing to each one.
"This one is for my cholesterol, this one for high blood pressure, this is a vitamin, this is for my knee pain," pointing to a half of a Tylenol PM, I said, "and this one is to help me sleep.""Oh, and look," she said, "it is two colors--blue to help you get to sleep fast and white to help you stay asleep."Her comment shows which part of the commercial sticks with us the best.
After all, I'm sure no drug company would advertise if we weren't more impressed with the benefits of medication than we are with the downside.With his dementia, Jim took a lot of medication.
Through the trial-and-error to find the best drug regimen for him, I diligently read the side effects of everything he took.
He was no longer capable of reading them, and I felt responsible for looking out for his wellbeing.
Once I mentioned to the doctor that a new drug Jim was taking had a side effect of confusion.
The doctor told me that all medicines have potential side effects.
That doesn't mean that everyone has them.
He pointed out that no one would take prescription drugs if we worried too much about side effects.It's not just prescriptions that have unexpected side effects and warnings.
All over-the-counter medication has them too.
That night-time cold formula "so you can rest" medicine cautions you to quit taking it if you suffer from "sleeplessness." On non-drowsy cold capsules, one of the first side effects mentioned is drowsiness.
That certainly won't help your job performance if you take it to help control your runny nose during the day.One good thing about it, Halloween will soon be over and we will be moving into the Thanksgiving and Christmas season.
There's nothing scary about those holidays and my reading needs to reflect that.
I'll put away the prescription fact sheets and dig out some inspirational holiday reading instead.
I'll stick with the delightful and forget the frightful.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 10, 2009>
One of the first things I learned as a caregiver was that I had to take on new responsibilities.
Jim was always the mechanic in the family, and until he developed dementia, I had never changed the oil or listened for strange noises cars make from time to time.We usually drove old clunkers and never left home without Jim's tool kit.
One time our van broke down on a country road, and Jim fixed it with a piece of wire he snipped from a sagging fence.
He had us up and running in no time.
On another trip in the dead of winter our heater began to blow cold air and Jim fixed it with a piece of cardboard.
Whatever happened, he analyzed the problem and had an immediate solution.Jim began to lose his mechanical skills, and we purchased AAA roadside assistance.
I missed Jim's expert attention to our vehicles, but with AAA and a cell phone, I figured we had the tools to get by.
Besides, the card was good for discounts on hotel rooms, air fares, and even at Hard Rock Cafe.Eric, our oldest son, worked at a dealership and reminded me when I needed an oil change or tires rotated.
When I had mechanical problems, my first call was to Eric, not AAA.One time Eric was on vacation and my youngest son, Rob, met me at the nursing home to take Jim out to lunch.
We had already loaded Jim into the van before we noticed a tire was flat.Rob crawled under the van and struggled to release the itty-bitty spare from its holder.
After changing the tire, he climbed back into the van covered with sweat and dirt.I said, "I don't know what I would have done if you hadn't been with me." Then after I thought for a minute, I added, "I guess I would have called Triple-A.""I just changed a tire in hundred degree weather and you have Triple-A?" Rob asked."Yeah, but I've never used it except for discounts," I said.
Since 1997 the card had not once been used it for its primary purpose.My Oldsmobile Alero is getting a little age on it, but overall, it has been a reliable car.
That's why I was caught off guard Thursday night.
It had been raining all day and in the back of my mind I was worried that my roads might be flooded.
Still, I went to dinner at Country Kitchen with other members of our Alzheimer's Support Group.
After dinner, we popped open our umbrellas and headed for our cars.
I was ready to go home where it was warm and dry.I put my key in the ignition and turned it.
Instead of the purr of my motor, I heard dead silence."My car won't start," I told David, a member of our group who was parked next to me.
He looked under the hood and said the battery connections were good.I looked at my watch and knew it was too late to call Eric.
He gets up so early for work that he would be in bed by now."Do you have any kind of road hazard?" David asked.
Funny, I hadn't thought about that.David shined a flashlight on my AAA card so I could dial the number.
Within ten minutes, my car was started and back on the road.Of course, the car wouldn't start the next morning.
I phoned a friend who came over and jump started the car for me.Now that I have a new battery my car starts when I turn the key.
That's the way I like it.
But if all else fails, I have my tool kit--a cell phone and AAA.
Better yet, I have friends' numbers programmed into my cell phone.
I can't break the habit of calling family or friends for advice about all things mechanical, or to give me an occasional jump start.
It's still nice to know I have three Aces in the hole to use for discounts or in case my friends become wise to me and don't answer their phones.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 9, 2009>
My friend, Karen Henley, sent me a link to an in-depth interview with her family and others.
Karen's huband, Mike, has early onset Alzheimer's.
His family cares for him at home.
To read the articles and watch the awesome videos go to http://longisland.newsday.com/projects/alzheimers/
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 5, 2009>
How I feel about autumn reflects how I feel about life.
When I think of autumn, I think of colorful leaves, pumpkin pie, apple turnovers, Halloween and Thanksgiving.
At one time in my life I dreaded autumn's dreary cold days and the miserable weather ahead.Autumn reminds me of trick-or-treat.
Being an optimist, I remember the treats more than the tricks.
I lived in the country where neighbors were few and far between so we went to town to trick-or treat.
Each Halloween night it wasn't long before word on the street led us to the houses handing out homemade cookies or popcorn balls.
We also learned which house to avoid.
That would be where the cranky old man yelled at kids to "Get outta here before I start shootin'!"One Halloween, Jim and I had the opportunity to play a trick on our boys.
They walked up the road to my brother-in-law's house to retrieve our dog who had strayed off looking for romance.
The full moon provided their only light.
Oh, yes, it was the perfect Halloween night.
The wind pushed mysterious clouds across the sky and wispy shadows hinted of witches, bats, or werewolves.
Jim and I hid in the bushes near the dirt road.
Our two sons were talking to each other or they would have heard our giggles.
When they got close, we jumped out screaming and yelling.
They were only startled for a moment, and it didn't seem quite as funny to them as it did to us.Autumn is more than dressing up in costumes and eating candy until we are sick.
Our unique inner clocks determine whether the autumn of our lives becomes trick or treat.
To some people, retirement means they have lost the focus of their days and feelings of self worth.
I look forward to it as a time to spread my wings and fly toward the fulfillment of youthful dreams put on hold for the greater part of my adulthood.
I see the autumn of my life as an opportunity to spend time with my grandchildren, write the novel bouncing around in my head, and relax with a good book from time to time.The autumn of life can be the perfect season to feel young again, a time to taste sweet wine and enjoy heady smells of spice, the scents of fall.
Autumn is the time to join in fall festivities and rejoice at the end of harvest--years of hard work and sacrifice.Chronic diseases like Alzheimer's or cancer have an autumn in their duration.
During the autumn of the disease, it is time to decide whether to spend your days dreading the cold winter ahead, or savor the kaleidoscope of burnt orange, warm golden hues, and cheerful yellows.
Do you want to taste the crisp juicy apples of fresh harvest, or put them aside and rue the day they became bruised and shriven?As we sit at the table of autumn fest, our mindset determines how much we savor the bounty on our plates.
It isn't so much life's physical tricks--aching backs, arthritic joints, a slow numbing of our minds--as it is attitude and ability to enjoy today for what it brings.
When we feel the sun on our faces, it helps offset the cold wind blowing at our backs.We cannot change the seasons, we can only change how we feel about them.
Life should never be in a holding pattern waiting for a season to change.
Living life in dread of the next season and what it may bring, can steal our joy.
I believe that joy delayed is joy lost.
The important thing is to embrace today and celebrate the festivals of the current season.
It is our choice whether life is trick or treat.Copyright (c) 2009
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 28, 2009>
For the past week I've been trying to put my house in order for our annual family reunion.
This year I'm the hostess for my seven siblings and their families.
My busy life has turned home into the place where I sleep, and housekeeping has fallen by the wayside.
While putting my house in order, I've sorted through years of paperwork and dug into hidey-holes.
I've stayed up past my bedtime every night for a week while I sorted, dusted, tossed, or packed items in plastic storage tubs.
If I had been on a scavenger hunt, I would surely be a winner.
I found the USB for the MP3 Player I recently replaced with an IPOD.
It was still an ah-hah moment to discovered I had tucked it into an old camera case.
In my Suzy Homemaker mode, dusting wasn't good enough so I removed a cloth angel for a thorough cleaning and uncovered Jim's long-lost dog tags on the hook behind it.
Memories were tucked away in an old Christmas tin.
I found tattered valentines from Jim and my eyes blurred when I read his "Love you always" signature.This week has turned into a trail of discovery as I ferreted out long-forgotten secrets.
I am not sure at what point in life I turned into a packrat.
It wasn't so bad when Jim was here to coerce me into tossing souvenirs and freebies from conventions and state fairs.
On my own, I just tuck them away, and add to the clutter.While I was frantically cleaning, my co-worker and friend, Brenda spent precious moments with her husband before he left his worldly home and passed to the next.
Ray had battled cancer and knowing his time was limited, he worked at putting his house in order.
He made his own arrangements and wrote his obituary.
His family knew his wishes and fulfilled them precisely.
Following Ray's instructions, his ashes were placed into his Honeymooner's cookie jar.
You can almost hear Ray's hearty laugh anticipating the look on unsuspecting faces when they see the "urn" he has chosen.When friends or loved ones die, it makes us pause and contemplate our own mortality.
I often say my kids are going to be really mad at me when they have to sort through my worldly possessions.
Barring a horrific accident, I should have time to go through all those tubs filled with things I can't part with yet.
I certainly plan to get my house in order so my family doesn't have to rummage through my belongings to separate treasures from junk.Death also makes me question the order of my spiritual house which has become cluttered and needs a good dusting.
Hopefully, when my time comes, my house will be in order from top to bottom and I won't have to try to make it right at the last minute.The best thing about a clean house is being able to relax without the mental nagging to get busy and finish.
When that day comes, I can truthfully say, "I can rest now--my work here is done." For now, I'm not even close.
copyright (c) 2009
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 20, 2009>
When Whitney and her friend Mariah donned their balloon hat, it reminded me of how we are connected to our friends.
Don the Balloon man's hat-for-two gave the friends a different kind of connection at our Sedalia Memory Walk this year.Friendship connections have evolved since my friend Sharon and I wrote notes in study hall.
To keep our words private, we wrote them backwards and held them up to a mirror to read them.
Now people email, text, Twitter, or use Facebook.
Many of us have cell phones with nationwide plans and think nothing of calling someone across country to chat for a few minutes.Not too long ago, I was riding with my daughter-in-law and my grandkids were texting each other--and they were both in the backseat.
Of course, one advantage of text messaging is that siblings can have a disagreement without getting the parents involved.I finally caved to the pressure and opened a Facebook account.
It is a good way to stay updated on what is going on in my friends' lives.
I'm sure all friends on Facebook are not necessarily friends in the true sense of the word.
Many of these "friends" are only casual acquaintances.
A person is not a friend unless we care about what happens to them, we keep their confidences, and we overlook their faults.
We support our friends and celebrate their successes without a twinge of envy.When we meet people, we feel an immediate connection with some but not others.
Our friends aren't necessarily mirror images of ourselves.
Sometimes we are drawn to others because they have a trait or skill we lack but admire.I have been blessed with many friends.
My involvement in my business women's group, writers' guild, work, and the Alzheimer's Association brings me into contact with a lot of talented people.
A combined effort to support a cause forges a lot of other personal differences to create a bond.The Memory Walk took months of planning, organization, leg work and fortitude.
My sister-in-law, Ginger Dollinger, and team coordinator, Sheila Ream, logged countless hours of preparation.
All this effort birthed a fun Memory Walk with music, balloons, face painting, raffles, prizes, and a cake walk.Friends pitch in and help you when you need it.
That's what Connie Pope did when she saw we needed help at Memory Walk.
Cindy stopped to visit while I signed books, casually bagged them and handed them out with a smile.
Brenda called to let me know she couldn't be at the walk because she felt she needed to stay with her gravely ill husband.
Sheila gave me a comforting hug as we released our balloons at the end of the walk.
These are just a few of the contacts I made with friends at one event.My favorite part of Memory Walk is spending a few hours with family and friends--hugs, smiles, and a lifting of spirits as we connect with each other.
Weeks, months, and years disappear when I greet a friend after a separation.We don't need a balloon hat to physically connect us to our friends.
A real friendship connection is not diminished by miles and time.
It has no boundaries or limits and lives deep within our hearts.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 14, 2009>
My daddy used to have a saying, "A day late and a dollar short." It was not a good thing to be the person he referred to when he pulled his brows down in a frown and uttered the words.
He had many pet peeves and being late and not paying lawful debts were near the top of the list.I'm not sure what has happened to me over the years because I struggle with being on time.
I wasn't raised that way.
I've self-diagnosed a bad case of White Rabbit Syndrome.
People with this rare disorder rush all the time only to catch every red light in town, have to wait on the longest freight train in history, spend hours searching for car keys, or have to turn around and return home to turn off the coffee pot.
Clocks and watches are not their friends.The world has just now begun to recognize this disease, and a conspiracy is already afoot to release the White Rabbit Syndrome suffers' names to email spammers.
My evidence is the large number of "cheap luxury watch" offers I receive in my inbox each day.Does anyone in his right mind buy a watch from an unsolicited email?
They seem to be wising up to my lack of interest in their watches because now I can't open an "Important Information" or "Important Request" without finding another watch offer.I was explaining this to my son, Eric, a few nights ago as we chowed down on Long John Silver's fish and chips."I get a lot of email from my website and blog," I told him.
"I hate to just delete mail from names I don't recognize just to keep from looking at more watch offers.""Speaking of watches," my daughter-in-law the nurse said, "did you ever get an offer for one with military time, and numbers with a second hand?
At work I have to use military time, but I need a second hand too.""I bet I'll be offered that kind of watch," I said.
"Oh, guess what I found?
My old Timex!
I think it was still ticking."I bit into a hushpuppy.
"Do you remember how you kids used to want to go to Long John Silvers so you could get a pirate hat?""Yeah, I always liked to eat there when I was a kid," Eric said.I don't remember feeling so rushed back then.
I also remember getting to work before anyone else.
I always seemed to get a lot of work done in the quiet hours before all those tardy last-minute-peel-into-the-parking-lot workers arrived.
I scoffed at how they jumped out of their cars and raced for the time clock.I was younger then, too.
Another one of my dad's sayings when one of us kids didn't jump fast enough, "Grandma is slow, but she's old."Funny how those words keep popping into my head lately.
I'm a grandma, so maybe I'm entitled to slow down a bit.
I don't admit to being old though.
If I were old, I'd just rest my case on my daddy's words and White Rabbit Syndrome.Instead of another watch offer, someone needs to offer me a time machine.
If I could make time speed up, slow down, or move backwards at will, I might be on to something.
Then, I could just go back and do "overs" as Jim always called it.
Unfortunately, we don't get the opportunity to do overs--time wasted is time gone.
Just like my Timex, time keeps on ticking until it's going, going, gone.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 5, 2009>
My life has turned into a NASCAR speedway and sometimes I feel like I'm driving a tricycle.
It leaves me in danger of being pancaked by the big boys.I'm not sure how it got to be September already.
What happened to summer?
Please don't tell me I Rip Van Winkled right past it.
Considering my sleep deprivation, that doesn't seem logical.
Somehow I survived the summer without once shinnying into a swimsuit, visiting a beach, suffering heat stroke at Silver Dollar City (so much for season tickets!)
or for that matter, turning lobster-red from a sunburn.
What a waste of summer months, and uh-huh-oh summer nights.I thought Halloween was supposed to be scary, but it doesn't come close to the feeling I had in the pit of my stomach when I flipped the calendar page and saw all the scribble marks.
Here I am on Labor Day weekend, laboring, trying to catch up to all the events that are now staring me in the face.Today started with a radio program "Open Mike" where Chris and I talked about Alzheimer's and our September 19 Memory Walk.
Then, I stopped off at the office to use high speed Internet and my duo screens to send emails and media releases for two different organizations.
After four hours, I made a small dent in my calendar to-do list.I only have fourteen "events" written on my calendar, so shouldn't that mean I have more free time than scheduled time?
That might be true if they were events where I just had to show up, but it doesn't work that way for those of us on the planning committee or in charge.
Oh, and let's not forget the 101 items that didn't make the official calendar.
That would be those things I intend to do if I have time.One of the best things about hectic life is I never have time to be bored, or even think about being bored.
My goal on Wellsphere is to take a thirty-minute stress break five times a week.
That doesn't seem like too lofty a goal until I actually went through the stress of trying to find a spare thirty minutes.In the meantime, I'll just keep peddling until I make it through September, and then, I can relax awhile.
After all, I have two free weekends in October.
Yes, if I make it through September, I'll be fine.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 1, 2009>
On October 3, Ted Distler and his lovely wife, Norma, will celebrate 50 years of marriage.
I admire Ted for his devotion to Norma and how he has held her hand and guided her through the quagmire of early-onset Alzheimer's.Besides being a devoted husband, Ted honors Norma by being a tireless volunteer for the Alzheimer's Association Mid-Missouri Chapter.
We met in 1999 when Ted was at the helm of the Jefferson City Memory Walk and I coordinated the Sedalia Memory Walk.
Ted was a formidable fundraiser, and I made a valiant effort to stay in the competition.
Although we squared off like championship boxers, we were cheerleaders for each other as we joined forces for a common cause.
Our ultimate goal was to help support families facing Alzheimer's and a cure for their loved ones, and our loved ones.
We knew our local Chapter was providing that support for Mid-Missouri families.Ted and I met for coffee one day and worked on a story for Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love.
Norma and Ted's story of unconditional love, courage, and devotion is posted on the Mid-Missouri Chapter's website at http://www.alz.org/mid-missouri/in_my_community_17573.asp.Congratulations, Ted and Norma!
I wish you blessings and love with each step of your journey.------"Promises to Keep" published in Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 29, 2009>
Colorado mountain pines whisper my name and beckon me to the quiet hush of a cool mountain morning.
I always referred to vacation as a time to recharge my batteries, but it doesn't have quite the same meaning it used to have.I fell in love with the mountains on our first camping trip in 1983.
To humor Jim, I agreed to camp at the Moraine Park campgrounds in Rocky Mountain National Park.
Everyone expected us to be home after a few days because, to put it mildly, I never considered camping to be a relaxing experience.
Sleeping on a hard surface in extreme Missouri heat, while slapping mosquitoes, was not my idea of fun.Jim was an accomplished camper from a lifetime of outdoors adventures.
He loved the Colorado mountains and each year we set aside a week to get away from everyday stress and recharge our spiritual batteries.Jim spoiled me on our vacations.
On cool Colorado mornings, he would rise before the sun peeked over the mountains, build a campfire, and brew coffee.
Jim would open the van door, and hand me a cup of coffee while I huddled under the heavy quilts in bed."Breakfast is almost ready, Princess," Jim would say.
The scent of bacon frying on the Coleman camp stove promised a tasty, hearty meal.
"Get up sleepy, head, we are in the mountains!" Joy would shine on Jim's face as we planned the day--an aerial tramway ride, hiking, and an early evening drive through the park to watch deer and elk.In retrospect, I can measure the progression of Jim's dementia by our trips to Colorado.
By 1997, camping was beyond Jim's capabilities and although we still drove to our beloved mountains, we stayed in a hotel.
Then, the trips ended as Jim became more confused and eventually entered long-term care.After Jim's death in 2005, I made a bittersweet return to the mountains.
Long's Peak looked the same, but I noticed other changes.
We used to walk around the Beaver Pond to watch ducks and fish in the clear water below.
Now, a small trickle moves past a truncated ramp near the reclaimed meadow.
A drive up the Big Thompson doesn't seem as great without browsing the Glen Comfort store filled with exquisite Native American pottery and storytellers.Now, instead of camping at Moraine Park, I find a hotel with high speed Internet.
The batteries I recharge are in my Dell netbook, camera, and cell phone.
Instead of getting away from it all, I take it all with me.Maybe it's my age, but I find some of the changes to be good.
I can idealize past vacations through selective memory, but a lot is to be said for having a private bathroom, satellite TV, air conditioning or heat as needed and a comfortable bed.
The cell phone and Internet keep me from getting behind on everything happening back home.
Now, I can take hundreds of pictures on my camera and never have to buy a roll of film.Yes, many things have changed, but vacation shouldn't be an attempt to recapture the past.
It should be a time for new experiences, to breathe the fresh air of today and appreciate the beauty of now.
When I look at the majestic view from Trail Ridge Road or gaze at the reflection of the mountains in Bear Lake, I feel a small charge of electric current flow through my spiritual self.
Can that be my batteries recharging?
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 22, 2009>
This year at the fair, I controlled the energy bicycle.
Dawn, one of my co-workers, gave me a quick demonstration when I took over for her."Flip on the fan first," she said.
"Anyone can get that going." The idea was to peddle the bicycle to generate enough energy to light up a series of items.
"I do the florescent light next, because it's easy too."I gave it a try.
I got the fan going and the florescent light flickered feebly.
Then, the bike felt like it hit a brick wall--and I was done.I felt like a Carney beckoning people to step up and show their skill.
Most people could start the fan, a lamp, a teensy TV, and the florescent bulb, but when I switched on the 25 watt bulb, the game was over.
Another loser!
Five bulbs remained unlit.My boss dropped by the Co-op Building and hopped on the bike to show what he could do.
He pumped away without showing any exertion--ah, to have the energy of the young again.
I flipped switches working my way from bottom to top.
He began to breathe harder and with only two switches left he couldn't budge the pedals.About an hour later a teenager wanted to ride the bike.
Her mom signed the permission slip, and she hopped on.
She peddled, and I flipped switches.
Her face turned red, but she kept on pumping.
She stopped at the same level as my boss."You're tied for first," I told her.
Her mom immediately signed a slip for herself and tied the daughter.
Not to be outdone, Dad straddled the bike.
He peddled until his face was beet red, but he slightly edged out his daughter and wife by making the last light burn brighter.
I really hoped he wasn't going to have a heart attack on my watch."You must be a competitive family," I remarked to the mother at their not-so-friendly competition."Oh, yes, we definitely are!" she said."I understand," I said.
"I come from a competitive family too."Could that be an understatement?
I thought Jim and I were going to come to blows a few times over cards.
He and Aunt Nita were the most infuriating pitch players I ever saw in my life.
Uncle Johnny and I couldn't seem to beat them very often.
They bid like lunatics.
"I'll bid eight, on my partner's hand," Jim would say.
Then he would toss a small card out, but if I put a point on it, Aunt Nita would throw a bigger card on.
The next thing you knew, she would dominate the round with all the big trumps.When Jim developed dementia, he became confused about which cards to play.
His mom helped him.
He was competitive enough to bid.
From the look on his mom's face, I knew he was still bidding his partner's hand.
From experience, I knew it would work most of the time.Jim was always competitive with his Uncle Vic and Uncle Orvie.
They played checkers at a furious level.
The bet was the checkerboard itself.
The loser had to sign away his championship and give the board to the winner.
Uncle Vic had possession of the checkerboard when he died unexpectedly.
He left the checkerboard and the championship to Jim.Jim and Uncle Orvie were Mario Karts aficionados.
Uncle Orvie's rheumatoid arthritis twisted his fingers into odd shapes.
You would think Jim would have cut his uncle some slack due to his handicap.
No way.
Those two played game after game.
"Let's go for the best two out of three," the loser would say.
"Now let's play for the championship--the best nine out of ten!" On and on they played.
Each wanting to win the fierce, not-always-friendly competition.In "You're Going the Wrong Way" published in A Cup of Comfort for Families Touched by Alzheimer's I describe my dismal Mario Kart experience.
I not only couldn't beat Jim, I couldn't keep my kart on the track going in the correct direction."I don't know how to play," I would tell Jim after I lost another game.
"Which buttons do I push?"His aphasia had limited his communication skills and he couldn't explain the game to me.
"I have no idea," he would say, using one of his stock phrases.Right before he zipped Toad across the finish line, he would remind me, "You're going the wrong way!"He would tell me how to play if he could, I always reassured myself.
Surely that was not the gleam of not-so-friendly competition in his eyes.
Or was it?
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 16, 2009>
The State Fair started Thursday with a parade and $1 night.
By the time I got off work at 6:00, we had already heard that traffic was snarled and you couldn't get close to the parade route.
Without giving it a second thought, I headed north toward home avoiding the whole mess, fair and all.
Our fair always has a theme, and this year the theme is "Rural Lifestyles Showcase" with an emphasis on "Country Living--Not Just for Farmers." I'm not sure which is really the theme, but it would seem that the Children's Barnyard beat out the carnival for top billing this year.The State Fair changes everything in Sedalia and puts a crimp in our rural lifestyle for the duration.
Getting across town usually takes about fifteen minutes on a high traffic day, but during the fair, traffic jams up from one end of town to the other.
We have two kinds of locals--those who spend a lot of time at the fair, and those who leave town.I've lived in Sedalia since 1972, and I've seen a lot of fairs come and go.
I have fond memories of Tammy Wynette singing to Jim, a lot of great concerts, free shows at the Bud tent, herding kids through the carnival, corndogs, ice cream and snow cones.The last time Jim went to the fair, his dementia had advanced to the point he needed to be supervised.
I had asked Jim if he wanted to go to the Clint Black concert with me and he emphatically declined my invitation.
I made arrangements for my niece, Rhonda, to go with me instead.
At the last minute, Jim changed his mind.
When I couldn't get a seat anywhere near ours, I bought two tickets and asked his sister, Ginger, to take him.
It was quite an adventure for Ginger to try to keep up with Jim.
She had to be pretty quick to pay for the water he pulled out of the barrels in front of the vendor carts.
After a busy afternoon and evening at the concert, we walked to the parking lot together.
Rhonda and I pulled out, while Ginger and Jim sat in his Nissan truck.
I figured they would be along soon.
When they finally got home, Ginger told me she turned the lights on, but each time she let go of the knob, they went off.
Jim laughed at her, but couldn't tell her how to get them to stay on.
They sat in the lot until Ginger finally figured it out.Yes, I have fond memories of the fair, but I also remember sunburns, blistered feet, sick kids, lightening and wind storms, and suffocating heat.
A few years ago, I took my grandkids to the fair and if they hadn't helped me find the car, I might still be wandering around the parking lot looking for it.
Last year, I found my car after the Air Supply concert, but in the unlit parking lot, I drove around looking for a way out that didn't involve a deep ditch.
I finally followed another car out of the lot that seemed to know where the one driveway was.
It almost makes me think I shouldn't be attending the fair without supervision, at least after dark.I plan on working a few hours at the Rural Electric Co-op Building this year.
That will probably be my one and only time at the country showcase.
Other than that, I plan on avoiding town until the fair is over and our rural lifestyle returns.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 8, 2009>
On this hot August Saturday morning, I grabbed a cup of coffee and hopped onto the Internet to check email before making my weekly blog post.
"Hopped" may be too bold a word to describe dial-up in a high-speed world.
My computer looks like the one on the right in the commercial--the one that has loaded a sliver of data while the one on the left displays a complete picture.My first introduction to a computer was in 1980 when I was hired to enter customer information on an IBM System 34.
I typed data onto a screen, pressed enter, and waited a half minute or so for the information to be added to the file and display the next input screen.
It all seemed pretty fast compared to the handwritten sheets we filled out in the subscription department of Full Cry magazine.My home dial-up has become a virtual turtle in comparison to the high-speed Internet at work.
To make matters more inequitable, this week our IT department installed a new Dell computer with two gigantic side-by-side screens.
Now I can open up a dozen programs and slide displays around until I can see them all.
It makes me feel like an interior decorator.
Does my calendar look better here, or here?
Oh, heck, I'll just slide it on across to a different screen.On my dial-up, I find myself gritting my teeth while I wait for a graphic laden website to load.
I remind myself that patience is a virtue, but why can't it just hurry up?I'm torn between wanting speediness and longing for a more relaxed lifestyle.
This Saturday morning is so different from the days I spent, lying in bed drinking coffee with Jim, waking up slowly and not being rushed to do anything.
The two of us would fix breakfast and sit at our kitchen table laughing and making plans.Of course, as dementia changed the entire fabric of our lives, mornings sometimes started with Jim pouring water into the pot without a carafe to catch the coffee.
Or I might wake up and find him missing, jump in the car and drive down the road looking for him.
Relaxation changed to stress, and I discovered that for a person without patience, I learned to accept our life's changes remarkably well.
The Serenity Prayer became more than a plaque on my wall.I was never able to revert to my days of leisurely plans and now have a mental To-Do list that nags me constantly.
Sometimes, I have to re-enforce my memory with a written list, an electronic reminder, and sticky notes plastered to everything.
I need beeps, bells, and visual aids to keep me moving forward.
All I need to figure out now is how to multitask multitasking.I became a blogger on Wellsphere this week and Wellsphere encourages members to set goals and share those goals with like-minded people.
So far, I haven't set any.
My goals are planted in my head and can keep me awake at night with small encouragement.
Doesn't a goal of a more laid-back lifestyle seem counterintuitive?My brother-in-law, Terry, calls people who are constantly on the go "busybodies." I find his meaning to be more fitting that the traditional definition of the word.
I've become a busybody, and don't have time to be patient.
Heaven help me, I have a high-speed mind in a dial-up body!
****Check out my Profile and Blog on Wellsphere!
http://www.wellsphere.com/l-s-fisher-profile/143451
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 3, 2009>
On July 29, the Social Security Administration held a hearing on the need for Compassionate Allowances for individuals with younger-onset Alzheimer's.
Harry Johns, president and CEO of the Alzheimer's Association, was among the experts who testified for a need to streamline the application process for Social Security Disability.
By including younger-onset Alzheimer's and related disorders on the list, the waiting period for benefits will be greatly reduced.
In his testimony, Johns said, "Through the Compassionate Allowances process, Social Security can avoid the extra costs to the agency of numerous appeals and families can avoid the financial and emotional toll of going through a long decision process."I was interested in the testimony about primary progressive aphasia.
Although many people are aware of Alzheimer's, including early onset, they are not aware of the lesser known related disorders.
When I read the testimony of Darby Morhardt, LCSW, in support of primary progressive aphasia, I was surprised to find that Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD) was placed on the Compassionate Allowances list in 2008, but not Alzheimer's disease and related disorders.Considering the difficulty of diagnosing which particular type of dementia a younger person may have, I don't understand how FTD can be on the list and not Alzheimer's and related disorders.
Placing FTD on the list was a proper move, but that addition in itself speaks to recognition of the devastating financial and healthcare problems caused by dementia when individuals are too young to qualify for regular social security.If younger-onset Alzheimer's and the lesser known related disorders are added to the list of Compassionate Allowances, it would speed up the social security process for this group who falls between the cracks.When Jim was diagnosed with dementia of the Alzheimer's type, his attorney told us it could hurt his social security disability claim.
We had gone through countless appeals for disability based on Jim's loss of motion and constant pain in his neck and shoulder.
We were in the final appeals process when Jim began to lose his ability to communicate.
His aphasia made it impossible for him to present a coherent testimony at his own disability hearing.
Our attorney asked us to wait in the hallway while he presented the successful appeal to the judge.
We had been in the appeals process so long that Jim received back pay and retroactive Medicare.The very nature of dementia impedes the disability process.
Jim was one of the lucky ones.
Not lucky in receiving his social security in a timely manner.
He was lucky because I had a job with health insurance.What happens to those with younger-onset dementia who get stalled in the process because they cannot speak for themselves?
How does a family survive when a person with Alzheimer's cannot work and requires constant care?Too many times a person with younger-onset dementia loses his job before diagnosis.
Often a loss of employment means the end of health insurance.
Without a job and the inability to get a new job, it is impossible to afford COBRA.
It can easily take two years to get a diagnosis of early-onset dementia and even longer to receive a favorable disability determination.When a person of any age is diagnosed with Alzheimer's or related dementia, it places the entire family under emotional stress and financial strain.
To include younger-onset Alzheimer's type of dementia on the Compassionate Allowances list would relieve families of one of the frustrating worries following diagnosis.----Source: http://www.alz.org/
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 25, 2009>
Lauren Holland, a student at Wofford College, came across my Writing as Therapy blog post and sent an email two weeks ago about the Living Words program.
I answered her email and casually goggled Wofford College to see where it was located.
My Goggle search informed me that Wofford is in Spartanburg, SC.That information made me smile because that's where my good friend, Ralph Winn, lives.
I met Ralph at the 2000 Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum in Washington, DC.
Ralph and I, both board members at our local associations, were attending the forum with our respective executive directors.
We hit it off at the executive directors' reception.
"Oh, you are a board member, too," Ralph said with a charming southern accent that immediately made me realize he was indeed a southern gentleman.
"I guess we are crashing this party," he said.
Ralph figured he might be distinguished as the oldest participant at the meeting, but he was determined to be an advocate for his lovely wife who had Alzheimer's.The next morning I was free to explore Washington, DC, while my executive director was in a meeting.
I called the front desk and asked to be connected to Ralph's room to ask him to go with me.
He wasn't in his room, so I decided he might be people watching.
Sure enough, I found him sitting in a big comfy chair in the lobby.
That day we toured the Smithsonian and our friendship was born.Today, I received a second email from Lauren in Spartanburg, SC.
This time Lauren mentioned their website and I decided to visit the site to learn more about the Living Words program.
This therapeutic writing workshop is for individuals with dementia and a caregiver or friend who accompanies them.
I read blog entries, sample stories, program descriptions, and followed a link to a newspaper article about a father and daughter reconnecting because of the program.I know from personal experience that writing is cathartic and have always recommended it as a way to cope with stress and grief.
I knew from the stories submitted by Tracy Mobley and Charles Schneider to Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love that writing helped my friends with dementia.
Tracy tells me that writing helps her express herself better than speaking.
Writing gives her more time to think about what she wants to say.
Writing is not easy for her, but it is well worth the effort.The Living Words website chronicles the writing program in sufficient detail to allow the implementation of this program in other communities.
The website serves as a template for support groups, facilities, or other organizations to help families touched by Alzheimer's benefit from writing.Participants are not pushed into writing, but gently nudged into exploring their memories or stretching themselves to creatively answer writing prompts.
Workshops are conducted with humor and encourage camaraderie between caregivers and their loved ones with dementia as they share their ideas, thoughts, and reminiscences with each other.
Living Words is a concept with the potential to use the therapeutic benefits of writing to improve quality of life for families living with Alzheimer's.Visit Living Words website at www.livingwordsprogram.com and see if you can be inspired to offer a similar program in your community.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 18, 2009>
I found myself in a funk--tired, rundown, and overdrawn on vitality.
To regain my normal optimistic outlook on life, I decided to take a mini-vacation with nary a single plan to clutter up my do-nothingness.
Usually the idea of taking three days off work in the middle of a Missouri July means chilling out under the air conditioner.Wednesday, I went to Kansas City and wore one of my "Life is Good" T-shirts for luck.
I ventured into Dick's Sporting Goods to see what kind of mid-summer bargains they might have.
I practically glowed with optimism when I found my favorite T-shirts on sale and snapped up four "Life is Good" long-sleeved T-shirts.
Well, I figured I couldn't wear them until fall, but knew I'd get my money's worth then.When I was in Boston last year I visited the original Life is Good store.
That's where I heard the Bert and John Jacobs' story.
These two guys made their start by selling T-shirts out of the back of a van.
With a creative idea and a vanload of optimism, their achievements must have exceeded their wildest optimistic dreams.Sometimes in my life, it's been hard for me to remain optimistic, but it is in my nature to look for the good in life.
That is part of what helped me make it through the ten years of Jim's dementia.
I sought out the good times, the quiet times, the loving times.
I found that by cherishing those small moments of joy, I could make it through the bad times.As we travel the river of life, we hit snags, whirlpools try to suck us downward, and sometimes we wind up high and dry on a sand bar.
When we navigate through dangerous rapids we find ourselves in mortal danger as we cling to life.We can recognize the dangers of a river, but often don't recognize the risk of stress.
Warning signs are everywhere--high blood pressure, chronic fatigue, depression.
We need to find a calm, quiet place and mentally regroup.
We all need respite from the pressures of life.
If we don't take time for ourselves, our inner optimism will die from lack of use.My mini-vacation became respite from work and hot weather.
A friend and I had a backyard barbeque Thursday evening and as we relaxed in lawn chairs a cool breeze sprung up.
Who would have thought we would have 70 degree weather on a mid-July evening?Today, I awoke to 60 degree weather and guess what?
I broke out one of my Life is Good shirts.
I removed the tag and realized that my shirt is named "Acoustic Jake."I still find joy in life's small treasures.
I find comfort in reading inspirational books like Joel Osteen's Your Best Life Now and Become a Better You.
This morning, my uplifting reading came from a tag off my Life is Good shirt.
These words surround the logo on the tag: "Do what you like.
Like what you do.
Optimism can take you anywhere."Life is good.http://www.lifeisgood.com/http://www.joelosteen.com/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 12, 2009>
This week I received email newsletters from two trusted sources, Alzheimer's Weekly and the Alzheimer's Association, about a Swedish/Finnish study.
The crux of the study was a marriage, so to speak, between dementia and committed relationships.
I perked up when the researchers concluded that widows (like me!)
were three times as likely to develop dementia as married women.
I read new studies the same way I read a horoscope--I pick out the parts I like and bah-humbug the rest.The researchers say that social involvement will help offset the dementia risk of living alone.
That's good news for me since I am by nature a social being.
I have been an Alzheimer's Association volunteer and advocate for the past fourteen years.
I'm an officer in a local business women's group.
Talk about an active club!
We move from one project to the next, and have monthly meetings, weekly friendship luncheons, and several great conferences each year.
Last, but certainly not least, I'm president of the Columbia Chapter of the Missouri Writers' Guild.
Oh, and did I mention I work full-time as office manager at a rural electric cooperative?
So, I think I have "social" covered.When the Alzheimer's Association first unveiled their Maintain Your Brain program, I had mixed emotions.
My friend, Diane and I were delegates at an assembly meeting in Chicago when we first heard about the program.
Diane's husband had recently died from early onset dementia, and she was concerned that people would begin to think that dementia was brought on by unhealthy habits.
I had to agree with her.Yes, we all want to do things to keep our minds healthy, but what about people like Jim?
He read, played the guitar, knew the lyrics to hundreds of songs, and he was only forty-nine years old.
He certainly was not at risk for dementia.After I learned more about the program, I liked the common sense idea behind the science.
Maintain Your Brain can be condensed into a few basic categories: stay mentally, socially, and physically active, and while you're at it, eat brain healthy food.
How to develop these simple, but effective, brain healthy habits can be found on the Alzheimer's Association website at http://www.alz.org/we_can_help_brain_health_maintain_your_brain.asp.Heart and brain health are connected in many ways.
So think with your heart, but before you sign up for e-harmony.com consider other factors that can reduce your risk of dementia.
A good rule to keep in mind is that if it's good for your heart it's good for your brain.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 4, 2009>
Music stimulates our memories and unveils feelings we thought we had forgotten.
Have you ever noticed how a song can bring back a flood of emotions?
A familiar melody can take us back in time, and although our physical appearance might shriek middle-age, our emotional age is the era of the song.If you don't think music can transform you internally, pay attention to the songs that give you happy feet.
Even if your body isn't up to the dance moves of your youth, your heart hears the music and your feet want to dance.Throughout the years of our marriage, Jim played his guitar nearly every morning.
He called it his therapy.
At work I often listen to KDRO radio, a local station that plays country music and almost every song makes me think of Jim.
One of the saddest things about dementia was when Jim began to have trouble playing his guitar.
One day he asked me to tune his guitar.
Jim, the man with perfect pitch, wanted tone-deaf me to attempt something I had never done in my life.
I knew his request was beyond my abilities, but I called his brother and he took care of it.Music has been a family tradition in my mom's family.
I grew up thinking that all normal families played guitars and sang.
On Saturday nights my mom and her brothers, neighbors, and friends sat on wooden kitchen chairs and played music for hours.
On those Saturdays at Grandma and Grandpa Whittle's house, my Aunt Venetia always sang my grandma's favorite gospel songs.My mom, Aunt Labetta, Jimmy (my brother), cousin Reta, and Gene Branch play music at the nursing home one Saturday a month.
Recently, I dropped by Good Shepherd Nursing Home in Versailles to listen to the music.
I wound my way through the halls to the dining room where they were set up on the stage.
Several residents tapped their toes and sang along with the songs they knew.
At the front of the room, my Aunt Venetia sat dozing in her wheelchair while my cousin Jan attended to her.
My mom and Aunt Labetta, as always, dedicated a special song to their sister-in-law.
Aunt Venetia is in the late stages of Alzheimer's, yet she perks up when she hears the music she's loved her entire life.When Jim was in the nursing home, his favorite channel was GAC.
His eyes were glued to the set when his favorite entertainers performed.
His foot would tap in time to the music that he once effortlessly played.With the special bond music has to our memories, it is no wonder that eyes sparkle at certain songs.
Sometimes the sparkle is caused by unshed tears, but often it's just memories dancing in our brains that bring life to our eyes.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, June 28, 2009>
Yesterday, I decided to sort some of our old home videos.
Jim was the cameraman and captured every vacation and important event on tape.
Sometimes, I would get irritated with him for turning our lives into reality TV.
Usually, I preferred to unpack while he played the tapes for the family.While Jim was in the nursing home, I couldn't bear to watch any of the tapes.
By then, he had lost his ability to carry on a conversation.
He was my best friend and I missed how we shared our deepest thoughts and feelings, our hopes and fears.
After aphasia stole his conversation skills, he became more and more silent and spoke only a few words in repetitious phrases.Jim had meticulously labeled each tape with his initials, JDF, and when, where, or what the tape contained.
I picked up a tape labeled: Colorado 1988 and popped it into the VCR/DVD player.
My screen was filled with majestic mountain scenery, deer, elk, and coyotes as Jim taped one of our animal watch evenings in the Rocky Mountain National Park.Jim taped our campfire breakfast the next morning, and to keep him from running the video camera while driving the curvy mountain roads, I taped our drive through the park.
Jim, as usual, narrated.
I turned the camera on Jim and he began to talk about our plans for the day.
"We're having the time of our lives," he said.Tears welled up as I watched Jim on the video and was reminded of the man he was before we knew anything about dementia.
He spoke in his quick-witted manner, relaxed, and happy in his beloved Colorado.
The mountains worked their magic on him giving him an inner happiness and peace that he didn't have in our normal world.
I was beginning to think that watching these films was depressing and a really bad idea."We are going to the Big Horn Meadow," Jim said.
"I'm going to feed the chipmunks." Jim was pretty good to follow all the rules and regulations in the park, but he had always fed the chipmunks."Why not?
It's only a $25 fine--per offence," I said."We can afford $25," he answered.Jim's bantering from more than twenty years ago chased away my tears, and I found myself laughing out loud.
Somehow in my memories, I had forgotten Jim's great sense of humor.During one of our hikes, Jim had the camera, and he said, "I've dropped back to film because Linda doesn't like for me to film her from behind.
Ooops," he said as the camera caught my rear view.
He swung the camera aside and then back, "Ooops.
And ooops."As we drove up Fall River Road next to a sheer drop off, Jim teasingly asked me if I wanted him to get closer to my side of the road so I could get a better picture.
"Oh, no," I said, "I'm fine."When the tape came to an end, I popped in a couple of tapes marked "Idaho" to see what they were.
At least that's what I told myself.
One of them was a trip Jim took to Idaho without me.
Jim shot footage of his cousin Joe in Idaho and in the next segment the camera zoomed in for a close-up of a McDonald's sign.
"Hey, honey, guess where I am!
This is the only McDonald's I ever liked to eat at.""Estes Park!" I said from my seat on the couch where I still held the remote in my hands."Estes Park!" he said...as if I wouldn't immediately know.There's no danger that I will ever forget Jim as long as I'm breathing, but memories are limited.
Most of the moments caught on film were buried so deep within my brain I would probably have never retrieved them.
Watching the tapes are a way of reminding me of the wondrous moments I've lived, even if nostalgia makes me cry until happy memories make me laugh.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 20, 2009>
It must have been a slow news day for the president to create such a whoop-la-la by smacking a pesky fly.
Especially when you consider the nasty little creatures carry life threatening diseases on all six of their dirty little feet.
Spreading diseases isn't enough for adult flies--they lay their eggs in places where the larvae can burrow into flesh and damage internal organs in unfortunate animals.I wonder if the PETA guy that protested the president swatting a fly has ever been bitten by a horsefly.
Well, I have and they hurt.
Although the lowly fly causes pain and suffering for just about every other living animal, PETA is supplying the president with a special trap that will not harm the flies.
The idea is to take the trapped flies outside and set them free.All this concern about small creatures reminds me of an incident that happened when Jim was in the early stages of dementia.
We were headed to town in Jim's Nissan pickup.
I was driving, and Jim sat beside me.
We had just turned onto the blacktop when he began to pull against his seatbelt and leaned forward into his seat."No!" he shouted.
"You're killing them!"For some unknown reason a mass of caterpillars were creeping across the blacktop.
"No!
No!" he shrieked.
"You are running over the worms.""I can't miss them," I said.
"They're everywhere."Jim was really upset about the creepy crawlers, but I just ignored his protests.
Why he was so upset, I really don't know.
It was just one more glitch in his thinking.I can honestly say I cannot recall one time that I was deliberately cruel to any animal.
I make it a habit to swiftly deal the fatal blow when necessary.
Maybe it's just me, but I have a tendency to kill flies, ticks, spiders, or any other critters I find in my house, or on my body.
If PETA considers killing annoying, disease-carrying bugs mass murderer, then I plead guilty.Oh, wait.
No one really cares if I kill flies because I am not the President of the United States.
Sometimes it pays to be an ordinary person instead of the rich or famous whose every indiscretion is caught by a watchful camera lens and published on You Tube.I found a tip on the Internet that makes me think PETA may be on to something with that trap.
Flies follow each other in their constant hunt for food.
If you catch a few flies in the trap, their buzzing will attract more flies.
Once the trap is full of flies, you can get rid of them.Maybe you are the kind who couldn't harm a fly and will set them free.
Or you may be a person who plans to terminate those suckers and rid the world of disease carrying pests.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 13, 2009>
This week has been really long and totally wrong.
Monday was my day off, and I don't have any complaints about it.Murphy's Law was in full force beginning Tuesday, which seemed like a bad Monday to me.
I started down the stairs to take towels out of the dryer.
I flipped the switch and the stairwell light burned out.
Why is it that when one light burns out it starts a chain reaction?
When I turned on my closet light, it went out too.
It's always dangerous for me to choose my outfit for the day when I can't see into the depths of my closet.At work I spent the morning putting out fires instead of working on month end.
At noon, I made a trip to Dollar Tree to buy table decorations for an upcoming meeting.
I was proud of my efficient shopping until I couldn't find my car keys.
I finally set my packages on the ground and thoroughly searched each compartment of my new purse.
No keys.
I patted down all my pockets, first the raincoat and then my slacks.
My son has a set of keys so I knew (as a last resort) I could call him.
One time when he bailed me out, he happened to pull on the door and it wasn't locked.
I don't like repeating mistakes so I checked the car door.
It opened, and I fully expected to see my keys in the ignition.
They weren't!
Now what?
Then, I saw them in the cup holder.You would have thought that would have been enough excitement for one day.
After work, I went to the gym to de-stress, and when I came out I noticed my trunk lid was up.
I must have pushed too many buttons when I locked the doors.
I walked over and casually closed it like I always leave my trunk open even in a rain shower.The good thing about Wednesday--it had to be better than Tuesday.
I forgot my closet light was out until I flipped the switch and nothing happened.
Still, I managed to get dressed and out the door on time.
At work, I jumped into month end.
I was a woman on a mission: Make up for yesterday when everything seemed to go wrong.An hour later I wanted a cup of coffee and headed down the hall to the kitchen.
I was preoccupied with work, but noticed one shoe was clicking and the other wasn't.
I looked at my feet and discovered I had on two black shoes but they definitely weren't mates.
One was my Liz Baker shoe with about an inch heel and the other was a Clark shoe with flat rubber soles.
And I thought my limp was because of my bad knee!I pondered what to do about this wardrobe malfunction.
My first thought was to sit at my desk and keep my feet out of sight.
That didn't seem like such a great idea since I had plans to go to friendship lunch at noon.
I couldn't imagine walking into Bandana's with mismatched shoes on my feet.Following the suck-it-up-and-deal-with-it philosophy, I walked into my boss's office.
"I need to go home," I told him.
I knew it wouldn't be a problem to go home, but I didn't want to just disappear for half an hour."Is something wrong?" he asked.
His concern was so touching that I couldn't lie."Not really," I said.
"I just need to change my shoes.
They are both black, but they aren't mates."On the way home, I thought about how my week had been going.
I was beginning to feel pretty silly, but blamed my problems on brain overload.
I'm sure it has nothing to do with my impending birthday or that nonsense about senior moments.
I saw how dementia changed Jim, and I know the difference.I decided to go with the Clarks which are the most comfortable shoes I own.
As I drove back to work, I decided the burnt-out bulb was the reason I pulled out mismatched shoes.
After all, if anything can go wrong, it will.
Isn't that the basis of Murphy's Law?We'll skip the rest of the week including almost running out of gas and pumping it in the middle of a thunderstorm.
One great thing about today--the week is winding down to its overdue end.
When I wake up in the morning, it will be a brand new week and I can scoff at Murphy's Law.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 6, 2009>
Living in the country is sometimes a mixed blessing.
The peace and quiet was interrupted this morning by the loud, obnoxious gobble, gobble, gobble of a wild turkey who seemed to be outside my bedroom window.
I looked at the clock and thought I could sleep for two more hours and still be getting up early for a Saturday morning.
The turkey thought differently.I have to admit that in all the years I've lived in this house, I've been awakened by barking dogs, cat fights, thunder, and several other annoying morning noises, but not once has a turkey been close enough to the house to gobble me awake.
I knew turkeys lived in the nearby woods.
When Jim was building our house he was up at the crack of dawn every day to work on the project.
As soon as Jim began hammering, the turkeys began to gobble.Missouri is overrun by turkeys.
They are awkward in flight, and seem to make up their minds to fly across the road just as a car is swooshing by.
My sister wound up with a tom turkey in her lap one time when he crashed through the windshield.Turkeys are more pleasant to watch when they strut in the fields, where they belong.
Each morning on my way to work, I look at the field I think of as a deer and turkey haven.
Deer and turkeys seem to frequent the same type of habitat.
Some mornings I'll see five or six deer and a dozen turkeys.A few weeks ago, I saw an unusual sight.
In a misting rain, a friend and I were approaching the toll bridge near Lake Ozark.
A turkey crossed the road with about a dozen poults lined up behind her.
The traffic stopped while the turkey family meandered across the highway.All these ruminations about turkeys should have put me back to sleep, but the persistent turkey outside my window gobbled every time I drifted off.
I peeked through the blinds expecting to see him in my yard.
I'm not sure what I would have done if he had been in my line of vision, but I was seething murderous thoughts.Finally, I decided to get up and make coffee.
While the coffee brewed, I put on a light jacket.
I walked to the road and retrieved the paper out of the box.
On my return trip, I heard wings flopping and saw a huge bird flounder off a limb of the oak tree.
He flew ungracefully across the gravel road, barely clearing the fence, and out of sight into the field.For a moment, I puzzled over what the heck that awkward bird could be.
Suddenly, it dawned on me that my turkey alarm clock was going off duty.
It never occurred to me that turkeys roosted in trees.I walked into the house and poured myself a cup of coffee and carried it into the living room.
I opened the patio doors to a world of chirping birds and barking squirrels.
With my early start on the day, I had plenty of time to relax over coffee and the paper.Yes, indeed, living in the country is a mixed blessing.
I'm up earlier than I planned, but it's shaping up to be a beautiful day.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 31, 2009>
When Jim was first diagnosed with dementia of the Alzheimer's type, I knew nothing about the disease.
One day shortly after Jim's diagnosis, I watched an HBO special on Early Onset Alzheimer's.
The show followed a brother and sister with the genetic form of Alzheimer's.
The sister was in the end stages, and the brother was beginning to need help dressing himself.
I remember the gnawing feeling in the pit of my stomach when his wife fastened his belt.
As the sister lay dying, the younger generation, a boy and girl in their teens, talked about their fifty-fifty chance of developing early onset Alzheimer's.
That show was a crash course on the relentless disease and how it affects the entire family.With families of 5.3 million Americans traveling the Alzheimer's journey, HBO has developed a documentary called "The Alzheimer's Project." HBO opened their airways to non-subscribers to make this program available to the general public.
Anyone with Internet access can watch the programs on the Alzheimer's Association website at http://www.alz.org/.Many reviews have been written about "The Alzheimer's Project" and this is not going to be one of them.
I'm only going to talk about my reaction to the series.I did well on Part I, "The Memory Loss Tapes," until the death scene.
Too many things about that scene brought back the emotional tumult of Jim's death.
As I watched the family's faces, I remembered the inner struggle to face the reality of our journey's end.My first reaction was HBO should not have shown that scene.
My friend, Ted, whose wife is in the final stages of the disease called me to make sure I knew about the series.
He said, "They are telling it like it is." I had to admit he was correct.I imagine not everyone at HBO was in agreement about showing the death scene.
I had the same internal struggle about including the final story in Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love.
I was afraid "The Aftermath" would be too depressing, but something compelled me to share Jim's death and my reaction.
Caregivers and people with Alzheimer's have enough to deal with to make it through the day-in-day-out struggle with dementia.
Did I want to let them know that the death of their loved one is the final insult?
That was the moment I realized that no matter how much I had done, the disease won.Part II, "Grandpa Do You Know Who I Am" shows how young people see the disease.
I think about how my grandchildren never knew what Jim was like before dementia.
Their image, like some of the children in the film, is of a different person whose brain has been destroyed by disease.The "Caregivers" is helpful with its real live experiences, and we plan on showing this film at our support group.
Knowledge is power and the more we know about the disease, the better caregivers we are.
Jim had aphasia early in the disease and wasn't able to tell me what he was thinking or how he felt.
I was blessed by becoming friends with people with Alzheimer's who retained their communication skills.
I learned so much about how a person with Alzheimer's feels from my friends with the disease.
I truly appreciate their insights, fears, and hopes."Momentum in Science," both parts, assures me that progress is being made toward diagnosing and understanding Alzheimer's affect on the brain.
One of the researchers featured in the film, Randy Bateman, MD, from Washington University, accompanied our Missouri Delegation on legislative visits at the Public Policy Forum in 2008.
I was impressed with his down-to-earth manner.The early HBO series helped me understand Alzheimer's, but the Alzheimer's Project has a much wider scope with its marriage of personal stories and the hope of scientific breakthrough.
Unless science moves forward and finds a cure for Alzheimer's and related dementias, death is the conclusion of the disease.
I look forward to the day when we have Alzheimer's survivors walk a victory lap at Memory Walk.
Until then, the only survivors of Alzheimer's are the caregivers and families.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 23, 2009>
Memorial Day is a time to pause and think about heroes and to honor those who have died in our nation's wars.
At least, that was the original purpose.It stands to reason that we would use the day to also honor other loved ones.
My Grandma Whittle called the holiday "Decoration Day." She and Grandpa loaded up a picnic lunch and went to Big Rock Cemetery to decorate graves.After Jim and I married, we made our annual pilgrimage to the cemeteries where our loved ones were buried.
Sometimes it was a strain on our budget to buy the flowers to decorate the graves, but it brought a sense of peace as we continued the traditions of our youth.Our first stop was always Mt.
Carmel.
From there we went to Big Rock Cemetery, stopped at Stover Cemetery, and then drove back to Sedalia to decorate graves at Crown Hill.
We made a complete circle and headed home with a heart full of memories.When Jim first developed dementia, I drove our usual route while Jim placed the flowers on the graves.
When Jim went in the nursing home, I went alone.
Decorating graves without him was not an experience I cared to repeat.Memorial Day 2005 was the first time I participated in the ceremony at the Missouri Veterans Cemetery at Higginsville.
I haven't missed a year since Jim's death.I was a little bummed about a conflict this year.
My granddaughter is graduating kindergarten Sunday.
My youngest son's family lives in the Lake of the Ozarks area, the opposite direction from the cemetery.
I told my older son, Eric, that I was going to the graduation.
"I'll miss the Memorial Day ceremony," I told him.I was disappointed, but I know Jim would have never chosen a ceremony for the dead over one for the living.
He often wondered aloud what good it did to make someone a hero after they died.
Jim always said, "Dying doesn't automatically make you a hero." Instead, he would tell our sons when they were small, "You are my hero."Jim never considered himself to be a hero.
He was tightlipped when it came to Vietnam, and I never knew Jim had received an Army Commendation Medal until he could no longer tell me why he received the award.
The commendation was nowhere to be found, and the Army couldn't produce it when I asked."Why would you miss the ceremony when the graduation is Sunday and Memorial Day is Monday?" Eric asked."I don't know why I thought Memorial Day was Sunday," I said.
"After all, it's always been Monday."On Memorial Day, I'll drive to Higginsville cemetery to place flowers in front of Jim's niche.
I'll be there with my sister-in-law, Ginger, and with other families to think about and honor our loved ones.
When we pause to honor our fallen heroes, we should honor our everyday heroes too.
We all know people who face life's challenges with bravery.I think about how Jim told our sons they were his heroes, and how prophetic his words would become.
They truly became his heroes when they cared for him with love and respect as he faded away.
For most people, decorating graves is an afterthought as they travel home from a weekend at the lake.
Others spend the weekend shopping at Memorial Day sales or pigging out at backyard barbecues.I always thought it ironic that Memorial Day has become a party weekend, not a somber occasion to remember the dead.
Maybe it makes more sense to use Memorial Day as a time to celebrate life and honor the living as well as our fallen heroes.
After all, we are surrounded by everyday heroes who deserve recognition for facing life with courage.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 16, 2009>
I was flipping through the channels recently and saw a PBS broadcast featuring Scott the Piano Guy.
I don't own or play a piano, but something told me this wasn't an ordinary show, so I decided to watch it.Scott begins his lessons by asking his studio audience, "Do any of you want to be a classic pianist?" No one raised a hand.
When he asked, "Would any of you like to come home from work and play a favorite tune on the piano?" all hands reached high.The Piano Guy has a unique method of teaching the piano, and believes anyone can learn to play in days or weeks, rather than years of lessons.
He is the first to admit he is not the best piano player.
He begins by demonstrating that it makes no difference which fingers you use to play the chords.
The funny thing about the piano, it sounds the same regardless of which fingers you use.Scott demonstrates how to find the mysterious (to those of us who do not play) middle C. He holds his hands out to touch both ends of the piano and falls forward onto the keys.
"When I center myself at the piano," he says, "my nose hits middle C." Mystery solved.Scott is entertaining, but he gave me much more to think about than playing the piano.
First, when you tackle a problem, you need to decide on your goal.
Do you want to spend years playing scales on the keyboard, or just play the darn thing?
Do you want to be perfect, or will you cut yourself some slack?Second, when you have a job to do, you can meticulously follow all the rules.
Or, you can be like Scott the Piano Guy and do it your way and write new rules.I think every caregiver can gain wisdom from Scott the Piano Guy.
What is your caregiving goal?
I will venture a guess that it is to take the best care you can of your loved one.
You don't care about being the world's best caregiver, or plan on being a professional.
Let's face it, when you become a caregiver, you can't spend years practicing before you know what you are doing.
You learn to be quick, think on your feet and be creative.As a caregiver, you can't possibly know all the rules, much less follow them.
You will find yourself making them up as you progress from day-to-day.
Besides when your loved one has dementia, you find out that what worked yesterday may work today but not tomorrow.Scott the Piano Guy is successful because he is innovative.
I can't think of a better attribute for successful caregivers.
When people with dementia can no longer come to your world, you need to go to theirs.If you learn to reassure your loved one and have a positive outlook, it helps both of you through a tough situation.
You can be the best caregiver for your loved one without being the world's best caregiver.Be kind to yourself and have a little fun.
Rather than argue over what the rules say must be done at a particular time, go for a walk and pick a few flowers.
Remember, it's not the finesse and technique that matters, it's the results.
If you make the best of each day and seek out moments of joy, everyone is happier.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 8, 2009>
One of the advantages of getting older is I don't panic as easily as I did when I was younger.
I think it's a combination of slower reaction time and the reality that I just don't have as much to lose anymore.All this media frenzy over the swine flu reminds me of what I consider its culpability in my own brush with death.
The ambiguous "its" can refer to swine flu and/or the media.I was a lot younger in 1976 and so were my children.
Eric was 6 and Rob was only four.
Swine flu had reared its ugly head, and to protect us from harm, a massive immunization program was implemented.
We were warned that since we had no immunity to this deadly virus, all able bodied Americans should be immunized.
It sounded almost like our patriotic duty to do so.
At the least, it seemed like our parental duty to protect our children.Jim and I had a disagreement over the immunization."I'll take my chances with the flu," Jim said.
"It sounds like scare tactics to me.
Somebody is going to make a whole lot of money out of this.""Well, I'm getting the shot.
I'd feel just awful if I caught the flu and gave it to the kids," I argued.
I played the guilt card, and asked, "You won't even do this for the safety of our kids?""It's just a bunch of hogwash," he said.My motherly instincts overrode Jim's common sense, not to mention my own.
I should have known that if you drove up in a car, stuck your arm out the window and had someone shoot an untested vaccination in your arm, it couldn't be good.
But I did it.
I can't remember just where the location of the drive-thru shot took place, but I think it might have been a bank.I was all right for a few days after the immunization for swine flu and I figured life would return to normal.
I slept better for a few nights smug in the knowledge that I had done all I could to protect Rob and Eric.About a week later, I began to develop some rather strange symptoms.
I was fatigued and overcome with a general malaise.
I barely made it through the day.
My arms and legs seemed heavy, my head pounded behind my eyes, and my body ached.
I wanted to sleep all the time.
I was sure I would shake the mysterious ailment in a few days.Days passed.
Each day I struggled just to function.
Then, a few weeks passed.
We didn't have health insurance, and I figured my vague complaints wouldn't help my doctor figure out what was wrong with me.
I remember being so despondent that I held a bottle of pills in my hand and considered taking them all.
Instead, I just took a double dose and slept some more.After six weeks, I began to feel slightly stronger each day and within a couple of months, the mysterious illness vanished without a trace.I never connected my health issues to the swine flu vaccination, until the dangers of mass immunization began to make headlines.
More people died from the immunization than from the swine flu.I recently read an article in the paper that the swine flu, or the politically correct H1N1 virus, may not be as bad as originally feared.
The comforting word was that next fall an immunization may be available for it.Well, I'll be immunized for swine flu when pigs fly!
I'd rather take my chances with the flu.
Something tells me I might have a whole lot of immunity.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 2, 2009>
My family doctor, bless his heart, is looking out for my overall health and decided I should have a colonoscopy.
Geeze, it certainly sounded like a lot of fun, but somehow I had dodged the experience for more than fifty years.
I had just reminded him I needed my annual mammogram and although that is pretty much having your breasts pancaked, it is not unbearable.
To be perfectly honest, I had never heard anyone say anything good about a colonoscopy.I knew I was in trouble when the Miralax concoction filled my pitcher.
Holy smokes, how was I supposed to drink that much liquid in two and a half hours?
When I make something I really like, sun tea, for example, I usually throw about half of it out after three days.The five o'clock hour arrived and I faced off with the first eight ounces.
I drank it in about five minutes.
I charted a schedule on my junior legal pad at fifteen minute intervals and planned to be done before American Idol.
I began to think that contrary to popular opinion, the prep really wasn't worse than the test.I congratulated myself on not having to drink the gallon of gunk they tried to give Jim when he was in the hospital between nursing homes.
H e had been kicked out of one home and after nearly a month in "regenerations" we had found another home for him.
The hospital decided to investigate his rectal bleeding before discharging him.
They assigned Eric and me the task of getting the gallon of liquid down him.
After a few swallows, Jim gagged, clamped his mouth shut, and refused to drink it."It isn't going to happen," Eric said.
He tracked down the doctor and told him Jim would not drink the nasty stuff."We'll have to force it down him then," the doctor said.
"He needs this test."No way were we going to allow that!
Jim's life was difficult enough without someone dumping liquids down him.
I knew he would vomit and possibly choke on it.
Against the hospitals' recommendations, we signed a waiver to skip the test.I thought about Jim and drank my second glass as easily as the first.
By the time I finished the third glass, my stomach sloshed and felt bloated.
I began to feel queasy.
I decided to call my daughter-in-law, Shawna, who is a student nurse.
Eric answered the phone."Ask Shawna what happens if I throw up," I said.After consulting with her, he told me, "That's not good.
Try to keep it down."My stomach had other plans.
I called back later.
"Part of it came back up.""Do you want us to bring you more Miralax?" he asked."No!" I began to look with each glass with dread."Then quit being a kid.
Suck it up and deal with it.
Shawna says it would be better to drink it a little slower and get it all down." Even through my queasiness, I had to smile at Eric's "suck it up" lecture.
How many times have I heard that from him?I threw up again, but managed to drink the rest of it.
Now, I worried all night that I hadn't gotten enough of the solution down.
According to Dr. Google, I would have to begin all over again if I didn't follow directions exactly.I made it to bed around midnight and was up at 4:00 to get into the hospital on time.
Ginger took me to the hospital and reported in as my designated driver.The nurses were very nice and covered me with warm blankets.
They inserted an IV lock and soon after, I exchanged good mornings with the doctor."How are you today?" he asked."Well, I'd rather be fishing and I don't even fish," I replied.Soon they started the drug, and I began to feel lightheaded.
I shut my eyes for a few seconds and then opened them again.
I could see a monitor.
I watched as the doctor used a shiny loop to snare a small polyp.
I was so fascinated with what they were doing, the time passed quickly.The nurse gave me a cup of coffee and some ice water to see if I could keep it down.
Anesthetic of any kind usually makes me violently ill.
The coffee made me queasy, but I decided it was because hospital coffee is usually on the nasty side.
I had been alert throughout the procedure and thought they must not have given me much.I was starving after a day on liquids.
"Let's go get breakfast," I said to Ginger.At the restaurant, I ordered biscuits and gravy.
Before the food came, I rushed to the restroom to upchuck.
Luckily I was alone so I didn't create a swine flu panic.I boxed up my breakfast and Ginger drove me home.
I spent the day sleeping and vomiting.
I went to bed at nine o'clock and felt normal the next morning.The prep really was worse than the test.
In fact, the test was a piece of cake compared to the aftereffects of the anesthetic.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 27, 2009>
Last weekend I attended my second annual BPW State Conference.
It was a busy and productive time.
I thought I might be expelled from BPW for standing up for my strong--perhaps pigheaded--beliefs.I learned from the best the importance of being true to myself.
Sometimes Jim exasperated me with his determination to stand up for his "principals".
I tried to get him to lighten up and admit that in a democracy, the majority ruled.
No way!
When he knew something was right, he defended his position.
When I tried to reason with him, he merely declared, "That's against my principals."My problem with BPW had nothing to do with our state or local organizations.
I am proud of my local Business and Professional Women's Club.
They are great women to work with and, boy, are we ever a busy group!
We hold fundraisers, activities and award scholarships.
The ladies in our local are my friends and I care about them.Even Jim with his principals, would have said, "If it ain't broke, don't fix it." Unfortunately, BPW/USA is broken.
My Jim-like round of stubbornness began when BPW/USA came up with a plan to charge a license fee for the BPW name.Our national organization has made some bad business decisions and is on the brink of bankruptcy.
They lost nearly $200,000 on the national conference last year and then lost touch with the very women they were created to serve.
After months of pleas for more money from our incredibly shrinking organization, BPW/USA finally realized the members couldn't bail them out of their mess.I'll spare you the details, but now BPW members are voting on a merger between BPW/USA and BPW Foundation.
This is the same foundation that recently gave BPW/USA $500,000, but suspended scholarships for 2009-2010.
Needless to say, that didn't set well with a lot of members.The merger plan got worse.
BPW/USA trademarked all their programs and the use of the BPW logo and even the letters "BPW".
This trademark was approved in January 2009.
Why would they do such a thing?
To protect the trademark, they said.
In reality, it was to charge an annual license fee of $40 per person to any woman who wanted to remain a "BPW" member and continue the proud tradition of our foremothers.What if we didn't want to pay the hostage fee to use our own name?
BPW/USA's response was to advise us to check with our Secretary of State to take the necessary steps to change state and local names.
The Missouri Federation of Business and Professional Women's Clubs, Inc. was chartered in 1938.
Our legal council advised us that this is our name and we don't have to change it.BPW was born ninety years ago in St. Louis by a group of women who stood up for their rights and to promote equality and fairness for women in the workplace.
These forward-looking women were not afraid to stand up for their sisters and themselves.Our Missouri women have led the charge for the past ninety years.
This weekend, we stood up for the organization we love and for the opportunity to revitalize and reorganize our group.After we discussed the proposed resolution to disassociate our Missouri Federation from BPW/USA, we were asked to stand if we supported the resolution.
The room was filled with my BPW sisters who stood up for what was right.I believe BPW/USA underestimated the caliber of women who make up their membership.
It wasn't just the newer members who stood up, but long-term members who have been involved in the organization for decades.
Women with integrity, courage, and principals stood up to be counted.___________________________For information about the BPW Merger visit http://bpwgrassroots.blogspot.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 19, 2009>
My alarm awakened me Saturday morning at the unreasonable hour of 6:00 a.m.
I attempted to clear the fog from my brain to figure out why the darn thing was disturbing my sleep.
I shut off the alarm and settled back on my Memory Foam pillow to listen to the radio while I contemplated the rude awakening.
After a few minutes, I remembered I needed to be at work by 7:30.
While I tried to convince myself to jump out of bed, the DJ played Vince Gill's song, "Rest High on That Mountain." What a fitting song for the fourth anniversary of Jim's death.
The epithet on Jim's niche at the Veteran's Cemetery is "Rest High on That Mountain." The anniversary had been bearing on my mind for the entire week.
I thought about it on Monday the 13th, which seemed much like a Friday the 13th.
I was at home that day, but instead of relaxing, I spent the day working on various projects.
Tuesday was a hectic workday with deadlines to complete before noon on Wednesday.
I ran into problems, but managed to finish my reports before Brenda and I left for the accountant's meeting in Kansas City.
By the time I got back into the office Friday, I was mentally and physically exhausted.
On this gloomy Saturday morning, all I wanted to do was sleep, but the Vince Gill song brought back a flood of emotions.
In my memories, I see Jim sitting on the rock ledge overlooking the Big Horn Meadows in the Rocky Mountain National Park.
Jim plays his guitar and sings a song about Colorado while I videotape him.
Tourist and chipmunks watch in hushed silence.
One brave chipmunk runs up Jim's arm and perches on his shoulder.
The Rocky Mountains soothed Jim's soul.
He liked nothing better than making coffee on a camp stove in Moraine Park.
He kicked back in a lawn chair, sipped coffee by the campfire and waited for the sun to peek through the mountains.
Jim didn't need an alarm clock to wake him in the mornings.
He was never a sleepyhead like me.
I remember Jim telling me "Rest High on That Mountain" was written as a tribute to Vince Gill's brother who died too young after a lingering illness.
The song spoke to Jim's heart.
Our minds play tricks on us, but I can't help but think that Jim told me about the history of the song on one of the many Saturday mornings we sat propped up on our pillows while we drank our first cup of coffee.
One of the things I loved most about our life together were the quiet mornings when we had our "together" time to engage in contemplative conversations.
At that time, Jim never suspected he would someday have a disease that would steal these moments from his memory.
As I lay in bed, I didn't think about that day four years ago, but instead remembered our ordinary lives fifteen years ago.
When the song finished, I walked into the kitchen to start a pot of coffee.
I opened the blinds to see a gentle rain falling.
The redbuds are bloomed and tiny flowers peek through the grass.
It looks like a Colorado morning.
"Rest High on That Mountain" seems to be a message from Jim.
He always said that death was closing one door and opening another.
I believe he wants me to know that although his death is heartbreaking for his family it is not the end; it is a continuance of life for all of us.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 11, 2009>
Like many other children, my granddaughter has a favorite stuffed animal she wants to hug while she sleeps.
Her bedtime companion is Finney, a Build-a-Bear puppy born in Branson.
From the time she warmed his "heart" in her hands, Finney has been her nighttime companion.Last weekend at bedtime, her question was "Where's Finney?"Her mom, Stacey, told her, "He's in the car with Daddy.""But Daddy is at the races!" my granddaughter said.
"Finney is alone in the car.
I feel so bad!" She buried her face in my lap.We spent several minutes reassuring her that Finney would be OK. My granddaughter insisted, "He's afraid of the dark!"Stacey handed her a big Teddy bear.
"You can sleep with this bear until Daddy gets home.""Why don't you hug him?" I asked her.
"He hardly ever gets hugs." The snuggly brown bear had a big sewn-on smile and an orange ribbon around his neck.My granddaughter hugged him tight.
When she held him out to look at him, she said, "Oh, Grandma Linda, his smile is bigger now.
Look!
He's so happy!"I finished a few things before going into my bedroom.
She was fast asleep on my bed with the bear hugged to her heart.With such a pleasant evening, I expected a good night's sleep.
Instead, that was the first night of a week-long series of bad dreams.
Night after night, I dreamed about packing for a trip.
Nothing seemed to go right in the dreams: the van showed up to take me to the airport before I had my suitcases packed, I couldn't find my passport, my purse was missing.
The scenarios changed but the disturbing dreams continued all week.Last night, I slept restfully without any bad dreams.
I awakened to discover my arms wrapped around the Teddy bear--his nose to my nose.
Daylight flowed through the windows, and I could easily see his smiling face.Not quite ready to wake up, I closed my eyes for a few seconds and thought about the weekend ahead.
Easter weekend will be a celebration of Easter egg hunts and services at the Mathewson Center.
But the best part of the weekend is my sons and their families plan to join me for Easter services.
With our hectic lives, it seems we are seldom together.With my eyes still closed, I thought about other Easters--the time Jim and his brother-in-law, Dennis, caught a stringer of fish; hiding Easter eggs too well and helping the kids find them; huge family meals at my mother-in-law's house, dressing the kids up in their Easter outfits, and a rush of other memories about Easters past.I opened my eyes and smiled at the Teddy bear I still held in my arms.
He smiled back, of course, with his sewn-on happy face.
Maybe my granddaughter was right--his smile seemed a bit bigger than it had been.
Well, at the thought of the weekend ahead, I know mine certainly was.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 4, 2009>
I heard rumors that the speaker at our Business and Professional Women's meeting, Vickie Weaver, had asked for clown noses for each person in attendance.
My first reaction was a mental rolling of eyes and words raced through my brain that I won't put in writing.I've always enjoyed humor and having fun, but usually avoid acting silly.
Clown noses sounded pretty ridiculous.Vickie presented the first part of her program on "The Art of Laughter" touting the therapeutic benefits of laughter.
We've all heard about life threatening diseases being cured after a person watched several days of slapstick comedy.The dreaded moment arrived and clown noses were distributed.
We opened plastic wrappers and plunked the red sponge noses over our real noses.
Immediately, cell phones were removed from purses to take advantage of this photo op.
I seriously hope there are not pictures of me on You Tube wearing a red sponge-Bob nose.I'm pretty sure our honored guests for the evening--a table of men, the chicken fryers from last fall's fundraiser--thought we had lost our minds.
A couple of them tentatively put on their noses, but they didn't jump up like the rest of us to learn a variety of laughs.My favorite was the one that ended with throwing our hands in the air and shouting "Wheeeeeeeeeeeee!" Other favorites were the "hand shake" and the "thumbs up" laugh.I laughed so hard my sides hurt and the muscles on the back part of my head began to ache.
I'm sure the good endorphins helped us through the serious topic that dominated our business meeting.
We discussed the imminent demise of the 90 year old BPW organization that we all know and love.
Our group is determination to continue with our local's good work even if it requires a name change.
Our BPW local supports community programs year round and annually awards scholarships.Vickie's timing was perfect to remind us of the importance of not just a smile or chuckle, but a real full body laugh.
It is impossible to take yourself too seriously while you wear a clown nose.
Clown noses and laughter put troubles into perspective.After a blustery, cold Thursday, Friday morning was bright with the slight chill of a Colorado summer day, the kind of morning that always makes me miss Jim.
It was my day off and I had time to think about personal pressing issues.
My broken dryer topped the list.
My sister-in-law, Ginger, had already dried two loads of clothes for me.
Now, I needed to figure out how to get the dryer repaired or replaced.As I poured my first cup of coffee, a moment of utter sadness over life's losses brought tears to my eyes.
As I fixed my coffee, I thought about how much Jim loved a cup of coffee.
He drank his coffee black.
He wanted it steaming hot so he used a thick cup and drank a half-cup at a time.
After his cup of coffee he would have fixed the dryer and it wouldn't have been my problem.I'm not usually one to weep over what "should-a-could-a" been so I brushed aside the tears to answer the phone.
A friend told me he was on the way over to look at my dryer.
My spirits lifted, and while I drank my first cup of coffee, I enjoyed the lovely spring day.
I began to hum--life can be fun regardless of those pesky day-to-day problems.I pulled my clown nose out of my purse.
Should I just pop the nose on and practice my "Wheeeee!" laugh?
Nah!
No sense in being silly.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 28, 2009>
When Jim and I became engaged April 5, 1969, our colors were purple and yellow.
Jim would tell me, "I love you with a purple passion," and then he would add, "with a yellow racing stripe." You have to realize that in 1969 racing stripes were really cool.Purple is the signature color of the Alzheimer's Association.
I really don't know why they chose purple, but the color can still be associated with passion.My sister, Roberta, and I arrived in Washington DC a few days before the Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum.
We visited historic landmarks and attended services in the National Cathedral on Sunday morning.
Cherry blossoms verged on blooming, and we couldn't have asked for better weather.Through past experience, I've found the most essential item for DC is comfortable shoes.
Even with comfortable shoes, we managed to return each night with weary legs and aching feet.
Everything in Washington DC is bigger than life--including the distance between buildings and monuments.We joined more than five hundred advocates to bring passion to Capitol Hill.
Twenty-four delegates from Missouri experienced the Alzheimer's Association's 21st Annual Forum.
Four advocates in our group have been diagnosed with early or younger onset Alzheimer's.Mike Splaine, Alzheimer's Association Advocacy guru, said because the Alzheimer's crisis is gradual it is in danger of being overlooked.
He said we needed passion and intensity to bring about change and take steps to make Alzheimer's disease a national priority.Maria Shriver, first lady of California, wasn't satisfied to merely attend the forum--she wanted to experience the forum.
She made her first appearance at the candlelight vigil Monday evening.
After speakers passionately talked about their journeys, we lit our candles of remembrance and hope for a future without Alzheimer's.On Tuesday, Maria introduced a preview of an upcoming four-part HBO special about Alzheimer's.
The heartbreaking message ended with the word HOPELESS truncated to read HOPE.Our group of 500 stormed Capitol Hill with purple sashes making us stand out from the crowd.
We visited our respective senators and representatives to speak with one voice.Our legislative "ask" was streamlined this year to three issues.
Research was at the top of the list.
We asked for an additional $250 million this year and another $250 million in 2010 to reach our illusive $1 billion goal.
The annual total cost of Alzheimer's is $148 billion.
If $1 billion in research funding could reduce the annual cost by a small percentage it would be a wise investment.Secondly, we asked for an Alzheimer's Solutions Project Office.
This office would be charged with leading a national effort to reengineer dementia care delivery.We also asked for a phase out of the social security two-year waiting period for Medicare.
Expensive diagnostic tests are sometimes delayed due to the waiting period.
Early drug intervention may also be postponed past the time when it does the most good.The "2009 Alzheimer's Disease Facts and Figures" highlights the prevalence of the disease.
Alzheimer's is a family disease, and every 70 seconds another family begins this journey.
Seventy percent of the 5.3 million Americans with Alzheimer's are cared for by 9.9 million unpaid caregivers.Alzheimer's Statistics can be alarming, but personal stories are the heart beat behind the numbers.
When a legislator looks into a caregiver's sad eyes or into the confused gaze of a person with dementia, we become more than a number.
We humanize the emotional and physical drain of a degenerative and fatal brain disease.Jim was in a nursing home when I made my first trip to Washington DC.
His dementia often made me feel helpless and hopeless.
The trips helped rejuvenate my spirit and gave me purpose.
I am friends with many amazing people that advocacy brought into my life.
Being an advocate is personally rewarding and I believe it is important for those with Alzheimer's and their families.This was my ninth trip to Washington DC as an advocate.
Jim died in 2005, but I continue to make the trip in his memory.
Each year, when I prepare for the Public Policy Forum, I take my purple passion and pack comfortable shoes.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 19, 2009>
Jim was a disabled veteran and received compensation from the government.
While he was in long term care, I sent his veterans and social security checks to the nursing home.
Jim died in 2005 and the checks stopped.I was surprised to receive a letter from the Veterans Administration admitting that some surviving spouses had not received the veteran's compensation for the month the veteran died.
Apparently, after all this time, the VA realized they should have sent one more check to me.Since it took almost four years before I received the letter, I wasn't expecting the check anytime soon.
To my surprise, it came a few weeks later.In my mind this was Jim's money and my first question was, what would Jim do?
We were married more than 35 years, and I had a good idea what his wishes would be.Jim had received a few windfalls over the years, and he always knew exactly what he wanted to do.
Whether it was a $700 winning lotto ticket or a $10,000 settlement, he never considered spending the money on himself.
He always had someone in the back of his mind that needed cash more than he did.It took me awhile to understand his philosophy.
We went through a lot of hard times when we were younger, and often I felt like we needed the money.
He always had faith that we would get by, but he wasn't so sure about everyone else.Somewhere along life's journey, I learned that the more you give, the more you receive.
I'm not talking about gift exchange.
Jim didn't care for or even believe in gift exchanges.
When he gave it was never, ever because he expected something in return.
It was because he just felt it in his heart.
He would open his billfold and hand over his last dollar to someone he loved.He wouldn't have wanted this unexpected check to be put in the bank.
I know he would want the grandkids to have something from "Grandpa Jim" so that was the easy part.
The more I thought about it, I knew where he would want the rest of it to go.It makes me feel good to know Jim's giving spirit can reach out and lend a helping hand to people he loved.
In my memory, I can see him smile and his eyes light up.
I can't think of a better use for Jim's check than to honor his legacy of love.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 14, 2009>
I am an Alzheimer's Advocate and participate in Memory Day at the state capitol in Jefferson City.
Wednesday, I made my annual trip to speak to my legislators.
My sister-in-law, Ginger, went with me this year.The biggest challenge of Memory Day is finding a place to park.
How every parking space within miles of the state capitol can be full is a mystery to me.
I looked for parking place close to the Truman Building.
My first mistake was trying to go in the entrance that is now barricaded with pylons to discourage terrorists, I suppose.
I went around the block only to discover the other side had only an exit.
I shot across a bridge to nowhere, turned around in a parking lot, and drove back around the block.I trolled the parking lot while Ginger kept a sharp eye out for an empty slot.
After cruising all around, we exited that parking lot and entered the one across the street for a more realistic chance.
Finally, in the second to last row, we found an empty parking place.
With perfect positioning, we were able to exit the car without stepping into the lake-size mud puddle that surrounded the front half of the car.My cell phone rang just as I hopped over the puddle.
It was Ike Skelton's office setting up a time for our visit during the Public Policy Forum in Washington, DC.
I juggled my bag and wrote the time in my calendar.A March wind gusted around us as we headed toward the capitol building.
Ginger and I wore pictures of Jim over our hearts.
In the photo, Jim wears his Stetson and looks like a movie star or country-western recording artist.After a short training session, we found a seat in the rotunda for the ceremony.
The ceremony opened with a "Hello" song and drummers.
After the awards and recognition, we began our legislative visits.
We made a statement by donning purple "Alzheimer's Association" sashes.
It's really hard to ignore 240 people wearing "beauty queen" sashes!During our visits, the senate debated and passed SB176 which calls for the creation of a Missouri Alzheimer's State Plan Task Force.
This Task Force will assess the current and future impact of Alzheimer's disease and examine the resources available for families affected by dementia.
After their assessment, the Task Force will develop and implement recommendations to help Missourians take a proactive approach to make life better for the 110,000 Missourians with dementia, their caregivers, and families.Our other objective is to maintain funding for Alzheimer's Service Grants.
The grants help the four Missouri Chapters continue with their important mission to provide services and support to families who are on the Alzheimer's journey.I consider myself to be a poster child for these services.
Respite funds provided by the Mid-Missouri Chapter were my only financial support while Jim lived at home.
The Alzheimer's support group and educational programs helped me be a better caregiver.
As a person who's been there and done that, I know the life-changing possibilities of the $539,000 service grants.
These grants save Medicaid dollars by delaying admittance to expensive nursing homes.
As advocates we asked our senators and representatives to support these two priorities.We make a difference when we share our personal stories with our legislators.
The heart of Memory Day isn't about politics, it's about the people we know and love who are living with dementia, and our living memories of the ones lost to the disease.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 7, 2009>
Just when you think reality TV can't get more unreal, "The Bachelor" might as well have passed out dead roses instead of red roses.
Don't get me wrong, I believe in love.
I just don't believe love happens because a producer chooses a group of attractive women to act like idiots over one eligible male.
The Bachelor in question doesn't seem to have many requirements, including a stable personality.I'm not much of a Reality TV fan.
I used to watch people eat spiders and leap off tall buildings on Fear Factor while I fed Jim at the nursing home.
Not for a million dollars would I jump between skyscrapers or dive into a tank of snakes.Survivor has never interested me.
I watched the Great Race a few seasons and found it to be entertaining at times.
American Idol is my favorite!
At least that requires a degree of talent.
Thank goodness Tatiana got sent home because she gets on my nerves.I've become bored with the multitude of bachelors over the years and admit that several seasons have slipped by when I haven't watched a single episode.
I could just barf if I watch one more hot tub scene or a woman wailing and gnashing her teeth because, "I'll always love him, but he didn't give me a rose!" Get real.
How do you fall in love with a shallow, one-dimensional player who is coming on to twenty-four other women at the same time?The camera caught all the details of the dramatic, long-goodbye when Molly got the boot.
Her tragic and crushed figure rode into the sunset in a limousine.
Tears glistened on her cheeks and her eyes brimmed.
"He's making a big mistake," she sobs.Jason shows his own anguish by bawling his eyes out before he regains his composure in time to fall on one knee and propose to Melissa.
They jump into the water wearing their good clothes.
I suppose ruined outfits are a small price to pay for the artistic value of the happy couple and little boy, Ty, frolicking in the water.Jason proves to be fickle-hearted and dumps his fiance on national TV to re-choose his second choice, Molly.
He said he just couldn't quit thinking about Molly.
Thinking is not Jason's strong suit.Melissa, needless to say, is a little ticked at him.
She speaks of herself in the third person, which makes you wonder about her stability.
The drama continues when Molly comes out and learns of the new developments in the love triangle.
Molly could have been a credit to all womankind had she looked him in the eye and said, "I am SO over you!" Instead her caught-in-the-headlights eyes dart as if she expects someone to yell, "Just kidding!" The show ends with Molly and Jason falling into each other's arms and locking lips.Do any of these people know what love is?
Maybe, but more likely not.
No pressure, but fall in love and propose by the final episode.
I think it's more likely the bachelor just tosses a coin.
It's a game, and the choice doesn't really matter.
He doesn't plan to really marry the girl anyway and by the time the final episode airs, the happy couple is no longer a couple anymore.Yes, I believe in love and I believe in reality, but I'm skeptical that love and Reality TV are a marriage made in heaven.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 28, 2009>
When I was growing up, a big snow was a lot of fun.
On snow days, we would drag out the wooden sleds with the metal runners.The Ozark hills provided perfect sledding terrain.
The road formed a long sloping hill on the north side of our house and a short, steep hill on the south side.
The problem with the north hill was the long walk to the top before the downhill ride.
The other hill was a shorter walk and a faster ride.It wasn't long before we figured out we could fairly fly downhill if we kick started the sled and plopped belly down and head first.
Well, there was the time my brother, Donnie, ran his sled off the road crashing headlong into the barn.
His broken nose ended his sledding that day, but it didn't slow the rest of us down.All this reminiscing began this morning when the forecast called for five inches of snow, and I needed to be in Fulton, MO, for our Lifelines for Women program.
Earlier in the week we had seventy-degree weather, and I breathed a sigh of relief that Cate and I weren't out of our minds when we selected the last day of February for the retreat.Yesterday, I heard the forecast--snow, snow, and more snow for Sedalia.
I woke up this morning relieved to see the predicted snow had not fallen.
I showered and relaxed for a few minutes until I noticed the ground was white.
By the time I left home, snow salted the earth and began to accumulate to fulfill the meteorologist's prediction.I expected the side roads to be slick, but was confident 65 Highway would be clear.
Wrong.
It was snow packed and traffic was running a smooth 30 miles per hour.
OK.
Surely, the Interstate would be plowed.
Wrong again.
The ditches were littered with cars, trucks, and trailers.
I got caught behind a vehicle traveling so slow that a snow plow passed us.
Have you ever been on the wrong side of a snow plow?
I might as well have been in a blizzard.
My wipers iced up and left blurry streaks all over my windshield.
Eventually, I drove out of the storm and onto beautiful, dry pavement.The drive home was normal until I turned off the highway.
The gravel road was challenging with its two beaten paths and pile of snow in the middle.
The closer I got to home, the deeper the snow.Finally, I pulled into my detached garage, put on my snow boots and tromped through six inches of snow to my door.
Is it my imagination or is walking in deep snow a lot like walking in quicksand?Snow just isn't as much fun as it used to be.
Or, are my memories a little deceptive?
If I thought hard enough, would I recall numb fingers and toes from the bone-chilling cold?
I have forgotten any spills, bumps and bruises, but recall the fun of outdoor wintertime activities.
In my memories, I don't think about lugging the sled to the top of the hill, I only remember the thrill of the downhill ride.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 25, 2009>
A book of my 2008 blog essays will soon be available on Amazon.com.
The proof copy was mailed to me today!
I'll keep you posted and let you know when I approve "Early Onset Blog: Essays from an Online Journal" for sale to the public.You might wonder why anyone would buy a book when the essays are free online, but we all have friends and relatives who do not have Internet access.
Others are like me and prefer to curl up with a book instead of sitting in front of a screen reading.
I refuse to take my laptop to bed with me!The Internet attracts people who have a second, or nano-second, to view and read material.
If you prefer taking time to relish what you read rather than speeding through online posts, this type of book is for you.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 21, 2009>
This week we had our annual health fair at work to collect the necessary data for a discount on our insurance premium.
Don't get me wrong, I'm a firm believer in discounts and feel fortunate to have good health insurance.
When Jim developed dementia, our health insurance allowed us to choose the best treatment options available.My first objection is calling this experience a "fair".
I remember the Stover Fair with its thrilling rides: Ferris Wheel, the Bullet, Teacups, Swings, carnies, hamburgers cooked by the American Legion, and marching with my classmates in the parade.
At this health "fair" I didn't see a single carnival ride.Instead, I arrive at work well before 7:00 a.m., grumpy, because I haven't had my morning coffee.
The highlight of the health fair is to give up a vial of blood to get current numbers for the online health survey.
Really, it isn't the un-fun fair that gets us the discount--it's filling out that darn survey.All of us employees have been successfully bribed with Donna's biscuits and Kathy's sausage gravy.
Man-oh-man, the building smells good.
Is that the scent of coffee wafting through the air?Soon, nurses line up, and with assembly line precision, shuffle employees to be weighed, get blood drawn, grab a blood pressure, and glaucoma screen.
I give Nurse Lana a hug--she and I went to school together in Stover.
We both know this isn't a real fair, at least, not like the ones in our memories.A long line snakes in front of the nurses, but there is no waiting at the glaucoma screening station.
I look at the green light and blink as air puffs into my eyes.
My reading is above the normal range.
Not a good way to start the day.I decide to work awhile and come back when the line is shorter.
I take a cup of water to my desk and hunt for a printout that has mysteriously disappeared.
I sip my water and try to ignore the headache behind my eyes.Finally, I risk the line again and it is much shorter.
By now, my head has progressed to a dull ache.Lana motions me to weigh-in.
It's pretty humiliating to step on the scales in front of your co-workers.
I didn't need the scales and a handy-dandy chart to tell me my BMI is too high.Next stop, blood draw.
Wheee, now we're talking thrill.
The nurse drawing blood is falling behind so Lana offers to draw mine.
Although I've been guzzling water for three hours, she can't find a vein.
They are all in hiding.
She looks at the other arm.
No vein, no luck.Lana says, "I really don't want to take it out of the back of your hand.""I really don't want you to either," I said.
Been there, done that.
It hurts a lot more than the arm.Back to the left arm.
Finally, she sees a faint glimpse of blue and sticks in her tiniest needle.
No luck.
After consulting with the other nurse, they decide I need to drink more water.I go fill my cup and drink two cups of water.
I go ahead and have my blood pressure checked.
It is high, of course.I drop back by the blood nurse.
She looks at my arms and shakes her head.
Then, she inspects the backs of my hands and now those veins are hiding too.
She tells me to drink water and let her look again in ten minutes.
My head pounds and I start to feel as nauseous as I did the last time I rode the teacups.
Finally, I say, "Let's go for it." I'm hungry and caffeine deprived.She slaps the blue band around one arm and then the other.
I make serious fists, trying to get the veins to pop up.
She sticks the needle in.
Nothing happens.
Lana watches as the nurse tries another spot and when she gets close to the vein, it rolls.
She prods around with the needle.
"You may need to come into the office," she says."There it is!" Lana says.
Thank goodness, blood is filling the vial.Finally!
I take my golden ticket and head for the biscuits and gravy.
You'd think that with my cholesterol, blood sugar, weight issues, I would eat fruit instead.
No way.
I filled my plate and headed back to the kitchen to get a cup of coffee.By now, my head feels like a ticking time bomb.
I take everything to my desk because I still have to find that darn printout and get a day-and-a-half worth of work done today.
After I eat and drink coffee, my head still hurts.
I'm not the only one with a sick headache.
Brenda, Kathy, and Donna all say their heads hurt too.After two ibuprofen tablets, lunch and a diet Pepsi, my headache finally abates.
Now that I feel better, I begin to find humor in the whole situation.
The health fair made us sick!The bright point in the whole heath fair/discount experience is we don't have to fast for the survey.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 14, 2009>
The movement to end Valentine's Day seems more vocal this year.
Has our society become so pragmatic that we think a day devoted to love is out of style?Roland S. Martin's commentary, "Don't be my Valentine," takes the view that since it is not a religious holiday, we shouldn't celebrate it like we do Christmas or Easter.
Isn't celebrating love as religious as Santa Claus and Easter Bunnies?Martin indicates that women have become greedy and needy for valentine's gifts while men are "pawns" who empty "their wallets in order to satisfy their lovers or those around them." Come on!
Martin should get the "Grinch of Valentine's Day Award."I cannot recall one Valentine's Day in my life when I wanted more than a card.
Expecting or even wanting a dozen roses was never on my heart-shaped radar.
Jim often purchased a single red rose at the local convenience store and personally delivered it to me at work.
Sweet!
I could have cared less if a co-worker received a room full of roses.
All that mattered to me was the man I loved still wanted me to be his valentine.
I'm afraid that I, and millions of other women, do not fit Martin's stereotype.Some historians link the origin of Valentine's Day to an ancient Roman pagan holiday to honor Juno, the Goddess of women and marriage.
The Christian version is based on a different scenario.
Emperor Claudius II devised a plan to build his army by prohibiting marriage.
The idea was that soldiers were not volunteering to fight and die for the emperor because they were reluctant to leave their sweethearts behind.
The legend is that Valentine was executed on February 14, 269 A.D. for performing marriage in opposition to Emperor Claudius orders.
In 496, Pope Gelasius set aside the day of the priest's death to honor St. Valentine for being a martyr for love.Historians claim the dates of many Christian holidays, including Christmas, were chosen to coincide with Roman holidays.
Of course, it's possible that the Romans had so many holidays that it was hard to miss one of them.
Is February 14, pagan or Christian?
My question to Martin is--what does the Bible call the greatest of all?Whatever the origins of the holiday, love is never out of style.
It is a celebration of the heart and doesn't inconvenience anyone.
We don't close the banks and post offices for it.
Happy Valentine's Day and may your world be filled with love.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 6, 2009>
Jodi Stucker, Phi Beta Lambda advisor spoke at our Business and Professional Women's Meeting last night.
I was impressed by the accomplishments of State Fair Community College students.
Local PBL students competed at National Competition and two placed in the top ten.
One young lady won first place in computer applications!At the end of the presentation, Jodi showed a slide of a beautiful fountain in front of their hotel in Atlanta.
Across the bottom of the slide was a quote: "If you think you can, or you think you can't, you're right."--Henry Ford.The "can do" attitude was instilled in me at an early age.
My Mom and Dad had a hard time raising eight kids.
My mom worked at a factory, and dad farmed, drove a school bus, and worked long hours as a builder.
They never threw their hands in the air and said, "Lord, how are we going to feed all these hungry mouths?" No, they just thought they could and they did.When our kids were small, I stayed home with them while Jim earned our living.
For several years when we filed our income tax, we fell below the poverty level.
Strangely, we didn't really consider ourselves to be poor.
We always paid our bills, and saved money when we had it to tide us through the times when we didn't.
We always knew we would make it.
I'm not saying we never worried, but we never let setbacks destroy our lives.In 1976, I began classes at State Fair Community College under a program called Manpower.
I had to be persistent to quality for the program because I was not the primary breadwinner in our family.
The second roadblock was the counselor's insistence that with high unemployment, I should study nursing instead of secretarial.
Let me tell you I was squeamish about nursing--shots, illness, all that blood... I knew nursing was not the program for me."You have to be top-notch to get a job in secretarial," he said.
"There just aren't many jobs now.
Nurses can always find work." He totally didn't understand why I wasn't jumping at the opportunity to be a nurse."I will be top-notch," I assured him.
At State Fair, I doubled up on classes and managed to get a two-year degree in slightly more than a year.
Even with high unemployment, I found a job before graduation.
I was able to do it because I thought I could.Later, the stakes became higher when Jim developed dementia.
You can imagine that my squeamishness had not changed a lot over the years.
Being a caregiver is much like being a nurse.
You learn to deal with illness and occasionally blood.
During the years of caregiving, I basically woke up each morning chanting the mantra: "I can make it through today."Money can't buy love or good health, but the lack of it can make life tougher.
Either accept the challenge to make it through the tough times and still enjoy life, or decide you can't and sink into despair.
The choice is yours--can or can't?
Just remember, you will be right.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 1, 2009>
"It's a small world" isn't just a slogan for Disneyland and doesn't just apply to children wearing Mickey Mouse ears.
Other lands and cultures are not the mysterious settings for fairy tales and novels they once were.
Now, we know people from those places, we may have toured them, or features on the Travel Channel makes us feel like we've been there.Other than rare trips to Sedalia or Kansas City, we shopped locally when I was a child.
We bought clothes at Nolting's Department Store and groceries at Cooper's.
My dad was a builder and he bought building supplies at Fagen's Lumber Yard.
Our choices were limited.
The world was huge and Stover was just a minuscule blip on the surface.Now, we have access to online stores and can buy merchandise in a worldwide marketplace.
Our choices are unlimited.
My co-worker, Brenda, found a rare 50th anniversary National Rural Electric Cooperative Association hurricane lamp on E-bay.
A few days later, she got a call from one of her neighbors who said, "I'll just bring it by and refund your postage." What are the odds that you buy an item off E-Bay and the seller is your neighbor?The Internet makes our world smaller whether transactions are with a neighbor or someone in another country.
Millions of us reconnect with old acquaintances or make new friends on the Internet every day.How many people do you know that fell in love with a "soulmate" they met online?
I watched an NCIS episode where Tony posed as a female to play a trick on McGee who thought he had finally met the perfect "woman".
It sort of reminds you of a Brad Paisley song, doesn't it?
A lot of people need Brad's disclaimer, "I'm so much cooler online."Through Internet searches, I tracked down two of Jim's old army buddies.
When Jim developed dementia, he couldn't give the information we needed to file a PTSD claim.
I turned to the Internet to contact two of the men he served with in Vietnam.
One man had a fairly common name, but I found a piece of paper in Jim's wallet with an address.
Of course, it was unlikely he would be in the same hometown twenty-six years later.
The other army buddy had an unusual name, but I had no idea where he lived.
After some Internet detective work, I discovered one friend had died from alcoholism and the other lived in Maine.When I began this blog about a year ago, I didn't expect many people would read it.
Last week, my blog was viewed 222 times.
Of course, that isn't much considering I potentially have a worldwide audience, but it's a lot for someone who grew up in Stover, population 757.I often receive emails that say, "I just found your blog today." One of those emails came from my former sister-in-law.
Which makes me think...it's a small, small world after all.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 24, 2009>
Several years ago during another economic downturn, Jim and I had just left Wal-Mart.
We didn't have a lot of money, so we had carefully selected enough groceries for the week.
We stopped in a line of traffic waiting to pull onto Highway 50.
A scruffy looking man carried a sign that said "Will Work for Food." Several cars in front of us rolled down windows and handed the man money.Jim said, "Roll down your window, Honey."Jim was a generous sort of man so I thought he was going to give the guy some money.
We knew what hard times were firsthand.
I began to rummage through my purse looking for a few dollars.
Jim beckoned the man to come over, and the man leaned into my window.Jim said, "Hey, I have a lot of work that needs to be done at my house.
I can keep you busy for several days." It was true that we could use help.
Jim and I were building our house with sweat equity, and we had worked on it for months, and had many more to go.I thought maybe Jim had lost his mind.
No way did I want this man at my home with my family.
Besides I watch a lot of TV and was pretty sure this guy looked like serial killer material.The man got a strange look on his face and no longer seemed the humble job seeker of a few moments before.
He looked to the right.
He swept his gaze to the left.
"I have to go," he said.
"Those people in the next car want to talk to me."I rolled my window up and slammed down the button to lock the door in case that Charles Manson looking character changed his mind.
"Are you crazy?" I asked Jim.
"I wouldn't want that man to even know where we live, much less hang around for days!" I was huffy.Jim just laughed.
"Hell, there's no way that guy wants to work.
He only wants a handout."I always hated it when Jim was right.
It would have suited my personality to hand the guy some money, but Jim was a man with quick judgment who could spot a scam artist a mile away.We pulled onto the highway.
"You still took a chance," I said.
"I would have been scared to death if that guy had climbed in the van with us.""Wasn't going to happen," Jim said.
"You don't look for a job standing out on the street holding a sign."I looked in the rearview mirror and saw the man back at the corner with his "Will Work for Food" sign held high as another car rolled to a stop and the window came down.
Sometimes it's easier to hand over money than to judge character.
In hard economic times, scam artists work hard to take your money and steal donations that could go to people who really need it.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 17, 2009>
I'm not a frequent flyer, but I fly often.
When I clicked on the headlines of the US Airways crash, it was one of the strangest sights I had ever seen.
The jet rested on top of the water with survivors standing on the wings waiting for their turn to be rescued.
I immediately Googled the crash to see what else I could learn.
The miracle story just seemed to get better and better.
Then I saw a YouTube of an Airbus Crash.
Wow!
That was quick.I clicked on the video and watched a plane getting lower to the ground.
I was disappointed as the plane went out of sight because I wanted to see the water landing.
When I thought the video would end, the jet exploded and a plume of smoke and flames shot skyward.
Wrong video.It did give me pause.
Why did one jet crash and burn and the other land in water and float long enough for all passengers and crew to be rescued?
What separates victims from survivors?Why are so many people terrified of flying while others, like me, get no more excited than stepping on an elevator?
It has nothing to do with bad experiences, but seems more to be something hard-wired in our brains.I've had a few harrowing experience aboard aircraft, but it hasn't interfered with my love of travel.
When I was eighteen, I flew to Hawaii where Jim and I planned to marry while he was on R&R from Vietnam.
My first flight was a non-stop out of Kansas City to San Francisco.
After a breakfast of eggs benedict, the flight attendants (called stewardesses back then) picked up our trash and made sure everyone's seats were in an upright position and seatbelts securely fastened.
The plane began a sharp descent and we came in for a landing.As the plane barreled down a runway seemingly in the middle of nowhere, police cars, taxis, fire trucks and ambulances followed us.
As soon as the plane stopped, an announcement came over the speakers, "Exit from the nearest exit and get into the taxis." We were herded into a building and stood beside our luggage as it was searched.
Our emergency landing in Denver was a precaution because someone ("do any of you know someone who would have done such a thing?") phoned-in a bomb threat specifying our flight and destination.
In 1986, about two weeks after the Challenger explosion, I flew back to Hawaii.
That time a TWA plane came so close to us that my sister swears she saw the shocked look on the pilot's face.It is not so much experiences as our personalities that determine how we feel about life's challenges.
Some of us are survivors and expect to continue moving forward with our lives.
Others feel like victims and expect more catastrophes in their future.Those of us who have loved ones with Alzheimer's, or lost loved ones to the disease, know the only survivors are the caregivers.
We are the pilots who land the plane on the water and wait patiently on the wings with knowledge in our hearts that we will endure, overcome, and continue forward with our lives.My next scheduled flight is to the Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum.
During these hard economic times, we need to ask for continued fast-track research to find a cure for the 5.2 million Americans with Alzheimer's.
It is unthinkable that all my friends with dementia are on a plane that will crash and burn.
We need to adopt a survivor mentality for those with Alzheimer's, and not lose hope that science can bring them in for a safe and miraculous landing.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 10, 2009>
Yesterday was an exasperating day at work--one of those days when Murphy's Law was king and lord of my office.
Phone interruptions broke my concentration and had begun to really annoy me.
It seems everybody has a problem and dog-gone-it I had enough of my own!When one more call came in, I forced my voice to a calmness I no longer felt.
This call, instead of adding to my angst, lifted my spirits.
Ashley Burden from the Mid-Missouri Chapter called to ask me if I would be an Alzheimer's Association Ambassador for Pettis County."Sure," I said.
"What will I be doing?
Do I need to know a foreign language?""No foreign language required.
And you will pretty much be doing what you already do," she said.
"As ambassador, you will speak to civic organizations--you know, give the fifteen minute spiel on the services provided by the Chapter.""I know a lot of fifteen minute spiels," I admitted.
I learned the fifteen minute spiels years ago when I was Memory Walk Coordinator and I haven't shut up since.During the course of our conversation, Ashley also told me about a new program called LEARN to address early stage problems.
This exciting program funded by a Missouri Grant will provide additional guidance for a family when their loved one is first diagnosed.
Additional respite funds are available through this program.
I know from personal experience how important respite is for the primary caregiver.Then, we shifted gears to the March 23-25 Public Policy Forum.
This year marks my ninth consecutive Forum!
I'm still as excited about going as I was the first time.
My sister is going with me this year and we plan to spend some quality time in our nation's capitol.
The Chapter wants to send a person in the early stages and his or her caregiver to Washington, DC.
I promised Ashley that I would think about possible candidates from our area.Ashley got another phone call and had to hang up.
I looked at the pile of papers on my desk: month end/year end reports with issues.
Numbers buzzed through my brain relentlessly working on this brain-teasing puzzle.
A one page report that should have taken less than ten minutes to verify had turned into a full day quest for answers.
Our conversation had been short--less than five minutes, but it brightened my day and reminded me that the most important things in my life were not on my desk.
I had let work problems fill my mind with anxiety.More important that comparing spreadsheets to printouts are Girl Scout cookies, basketball games, math club, and baby smiles.
Important things are editing my book and submitting it to an agent.
Now, an important thing is taking my Alzheimer's volunteerism to the Ambassador level.My Oxford American Dictionary shows one definition of ambassador as "an official messenger."  I have been a messenger for the Alzheimer's Association since my first contact with them before we had a diagnosis for Jim.
Soon, I will be "official" but that won't make me stodgy.
Being an Alzheimer's Volunteer for me is not something I do just because I want to; it's something I am compelled to do.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 3, 2009>
Well, here it is, the first Saturday in January and I haven't taken down my Christmas decorations.
The worse thing about putting it off, we have been blessed with sunshine and 70 degree weather today.One thing I've learned after living my whole life in Missouri is how unpredictable the weather can be.
I walked outside earlier to check my mail and wore a short sleeved tee-shirt.
Two weeks ago, we had an artic blast that left our water frozen and I went outside wearing my insulated coveralls, a heavy coat, and a stocking cap pulled low on my forehead.
I looked and felt like the little boy in Christmas Story who couldn't bend his arms or legs once he donned his snowsuit.Thawing frozen pipes used to be Jim's job.
Then, after dementia limited Jim's abilities the responsibility shifted to my shoulders.
Several years ago on a cold winter night his mom called me to tell me our water had frozen.
We shared a well and it was behind her house next door.
Jim sat in front of the TV watching Walker Texas Ranger and didn't even look at me when I told him the news.
I put on a pair of Jim's coveralls and called my son, Eric, and brother-in-law.
By the time I got decked out in my warm clothes, the two of them were assessing the situation."Your dad didn't even care that the water was frozen," I told my son.
"He's still at home watching TV.""I bet he would have cared if the electricity went out and he couldn't watch Walker," Eric said.There is no such thing as typical weather in Missouri.
You just take it as it comes and deal with it.For some reason, I thought that once the holidays were over, I could relax for a while.
Ha!
The next few months seem to be busier than ever.
Today, I need to un-deck the halls and have two meetings--one tomorrow and one on Thursday--that I need to work on.
So, I've just been flitting back and forth between reports, emails, laundry, taking down decorations, and thinking that I would really like to go out on the deck, put my feet up and watch the birds.It's foolish to waste a spring day in the dead of winter, and I do need to take the Christmas lights off the deck railing.
After all, by next Saturday the lights may be covered with a coat of ice and subzero wind chills might make me want to burrow into a blanket and watch an NCIS marathon.My granddaughter will be here soon and if I don't get the halls un-decked, she will no doubt tell me, "Grandma Linda, Christmas is OVER."  I have the Christmas tree put away, but still have a few hours work ahead of me.
I can't decide if the chirping birds outside my window are urging me to hurry up and finish, or just put it off until another day.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 27, 2008>
After eating my way through the holidays, I think the popular Christmas song is misnamed and should be changed to the "Twelve Pounds of Christmas." I always did find that song annoying and after "five golden rings" I was ready for it to end.
If you think of it as food, five should be enough.
Five holiday meals should be enough--let me count--yes, that's how many I had.Whew, sure glad I didn't have six.
If I gained two pounds at each meal and had six, I couldn't stay within the twelve pounds and have any cookies, peanut clusters, caramel popcorn, fudge, fruitcake, solid milk chocolate bar, or any other holiday goodies to die for.
With the damage to my cholesterol and triglycerides, "to die for" might not be a good expression to use.I was going to go to the gym yesterday to minimize the damage, but they were among the businesses that closed the day after Christmas.
If I reversed my habits and went to the gym three times a day and ate three times a week I would drop the twelve pounds of Christmas in a hurry.I can't even use the weather as an excuse to curl up on the couch and watch the snow fall.
After a few days of bone chilling weather and frozen water pipes, we warmed up to 63 degrees.
Yesterday my weather alert warned of flash floods, this morning the shrill alert was a TORNADO WARNING.
A huge storm moved through the adjoining county to the southwest of us...not a good place to be when they normally move northeast.Usually at least during a storm I run up and down the stairs with the question running through my mind--to the basement?
Up the stairs?
This is not the exercise I had in mind for two days after Christmas--the Stairmaster of Tornado Alley.
That sounds like a combination of exercise and a video game.
Do I take my decorations down, or let them go to Oz?
I wonder if a Christmas tree has ever had lightning come in on it.
I'm enjoying my tree, but I hear the rumble of thunder through the sound of the pouring down rain.
Christmas has come and gone, but as long as I leave up the tree and decorations, it looks like Christmas in my house.
I may need to shut the blinds because it looks like a spring thunderstorm outside.The good news is most of the food is gone.
Well, I do have a cheese ball in the fridge.
It should be good for a couple of pounds.
Twelve pounds should not be insurmountable.
I would need to lose a pound a month.
I probably lost 100 pounds in 2008.
Let me explain before you call Jenny Craig and give them my name for a new spokesperson.
I lost the same five pounds over and over.
I think my scales are stuck in a five pound section.Jim used to think my agony over five or ten pounds was silly.
He said I was the weight I was supposed to be and I was battling nature by trying to lose weight.
"Everyone is different," he said.
"The difference between eating what you want and what your diet allows is about five pounds.
Is it worth it?"My doctor thinks it is, but I'm not really sold.
Five pounds?
Bah Humbug!
Twelve pounds...break out the Melba toast.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 21, 2008>
Sedalia has gotten a holiday boost from our own personal hometown Secret Santa.
This lady has spread good cheer throughout our community and has distributed $6000 of her own money to those in need.
She has gone door to door, waltzed into Hardees and McDonald's, the Salvation Army store, and caught people exiting their cars.
Everyone's first reaction is disbelief.
When did we become so skeptical that we don't believe in Santa Claus?Like a true Secret Santa, her identity remains unknown.
The Sedalia Democrat reporters follow in her wake to interview recipients.
Out-of-work people, down-on- their-luck people, and worried-about-how-to-pay-for Christmas/taxes/heat/prescriptions--fill in the blank--people get tears in their eyes as they describe what they will do with their $50 or $100 the lady in red gave them.We all want to make a difference in the world and here is one lady who found an anonymous way.
She borrowed her idea from the millionaire Secret Santa in Kansas City.
Larry Stewart's identity became known shortly before he died in 2007 after he had given away more than $1.3 million.
Another Santa donned a red hat and continued the tradition in Kansas City, but this is our town's first Secret Santa.Somehow, I don't think this lady is a millionaire.
She might be, but I think she is just a caring, generous person who raided her bank account to spread Christmas cheer in a world where so many face hard economic times.
Her gift comes from the heart without an ulterior motive of self-promotion.
She cares, she loves, and she gives.Most pictures in the paper are taken from an angle that hides her face.
You see the flowing Santa "beard" and her face is obscured by the red-and-white Santa hat pulled low.
One lone picture showed enough of her face that people who knew her well might have recognized her, but the photographers didn't make that mistake again.She is adamant that she remain anonymous.
She doesn't want public glory, only the private knowledge that she has made a difference in her own community."Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa" but he doesn't live at the North Pole, she lives in Sedalia.
"Merry Christmas" isn't just a trite phrase to her, it's a personal mission.I tip my Santa hat to you, Ms. Secret Santa.
Thank you for reminding us that the greatest blessing of Christmas comes from spreading good cheer and giving generously to those who have less than we do.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 14, 2008>
Book signings aren't for the timid or those lacking in self confidence.
You may sit with pen in hand ready to sign the book you crafted with love and watch people walk by who refuse to make eye contact.
You may sell one book, twenty books, or no books at all.My sister asked me to have a book signing at her craft booth the day of the Stover Christmas Parade.
It sounded intriguing to me to have a book signing in my old hometown.I grew up south of Stover and rode the school bus for about an hour each way to go to school in town.
When the bus bumped over the Rock Island railroad tracks, I read the "city" limit sign proclaiming the population to be 757.
I think dogs and cats might have been included in that total.
One of the advantages and disadvantages of a small town is that you know everyone.Seeing a stranger was an oddity and noteworthy, especially since Stover had no tourism.
On a hot summer day in 1968, I met a young man with the broadest shoulders I had ever seen.
Jim's uncle introduced us in front of the Dew Drop In Cafe.
Jim still wasn't a total stranger since his Uncle Orvie knew my mom and her brothers and they played music together.After Jim and I married, we moved away from the area, and other than visiting my folks, I never spent much time in Stover.
On my rare visits, I sometimes saw people I once knew well, but I no longer recognized most of them.
People change and, gosh, how "they" have aged!The week before the signing, the local newspaper ran an article about me complete with picture.
Funny, how I looked like my mother in that picture.
I was hopeful that a few people would read the article and show up for the signing.
I took my book, Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love, and A Cup of Comfort for Families with Alzheimer's.
At most book signings I only have non-fiction Alzheimer's books, but this time I took Well Versed and Echoes of the Ozarks which include some of my fiction stories.
I saw people I hadn't seen in years, sold a lot of books, and really enjoyed the book signing.Last week, I was the guest on a local radio talk show with Jack Miller.
We talked about Alzheimer's and about the two Alzheimer's books.
More than five million people in the U.S. have Alzheimer's, so odds are you know someone with the disease.
Either book will help you understand how the disease affects the entire family.This Friday, I have a book signing at Sedalia Book and Toy.
I will be signing my book and my story in the Cup of Comfort book.
Sedalia Book and Toy manager, Sandy Diamond, sent out invitations to people we thought might be interested in coming.
I e-invited others and have a list to still invite.
I've lived in Sedalia for thirty-five years so this is my second hometown book signing this month.If you are in Sedalia December 19 between 2 and 4, please stop by Sedalia Book and Toy and browse through their great books.
If you want to learn more about Alzheimer's and become a better friend, family member, or caregiver for someone with dementia, stop by my table.
Whether you buy a book or simply pick up free Alzheimer's brochures, don't be afraid to make eye contact.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 7, 2008>
Health wise, last year was my luckiest ever.
I missed all the sickness and didn't have so much as a cold.
We all know what a difference a year can make.Last week, I came down with a cold.
I can handle a measly little cold by taking one day really easy.
So, I spent last Sunday self medicating, fully confident that Monday would be full steam ahead.I felt better Monday morning so I went to work at 7:00 a.m. as usual.
About 10:00, my ear stopped up.
I called the doctor and he penciled me into a 12:00 cancellation."You have an ear infection," he said.
He wrote a prescription for an antibiotic and sent me on my way.
By now the whole left side of my face throbbed.At Wal-Mart, I dropped off the prescription at the appropriate window and went to buy some chicken soup and green tea.
While I shopped, I remembered the problems Jim had with his ears and how he couldn't tell us how it hurt.
Jim had aphasia and rarely spoke so it took observation to determine when he wasn't feeling well.
One time, his balance was off, and a nurse at the nursing home decided to take him across the lot to our family doctor's office to have his ears irrigated."Does he speak at all?" the doctor asked the nurse as Jim silently sat on the examining table.
The doctor visited Jim regularly in the nursing home and hadn't heard Jim say anything in years."Not much," the nurse said.The doctor poked an Otoscope in Jim's ear to take a look."Jesus Christ!" Jim yelled and jumped off the examining table scowling at the doctor."I thought you said he didn't talk," the doctor said."I said, 'Not much'," she replied.I pushed my thoughts of Jim aside and got in line behind a woman with coupons and questions dealing with a novice checker.
Ten minutes later, I paid for my few items and headed back to the pharmacy to check on my prescription.
After I stood in another line, I picked up my medicine and headed home.By now my ear sounded like it had ten thousand cicadas in it.
Occasionally it would "thump" like the little drummer boy had given it a whack.
After all these years, I began to think of an ear drum as a real drum.After a short winter's nap, I woke up and the pressure wasn't as bad, but I felt liquid in my ear.
I used a Kleenex to wipe out my ear and bright red blood covered it.
I called my doctor at home.
He explained how the pressure had ruptured my ear drum, but he was confident that it would heal.
"I never knew of anyone to bleed to death from their ear," he said.Oh, crap.
I hadn't even thought of that!
Didn't the cowboys in TV westerns often bleed from their ears right before they died?The doctor was correct, and I didn't bleed to death and the ear eventually stopped hurting.
I've become accustomed to the humming and the drummer boy has laid down his sticks.
I can't hear well out of the ear yet and my sound perception is askew.
When I turn on the water, it sounds like it is running somewhere off to my right.
My hearing has always been excellent and I thought God was compensating me for my poor eyesight.
According to Google, my ear drum will probably heal on its own, but I have a few options if it doesn't before I need to break out the hearing aides.For now, it's always summer in my ear, and it's a good year for cicadas.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 29, 2008>
I want to thank everyone who helped the economy by following tradition and shopping on Black Friday, especially those of you who did not trample anyone in the process.
That had pretty much been a joke until this year when a young man was killed by a stampede of bargain hunters at a Wal-Mart store in New York.My one and only experience of Black Friday shopping occurred probably thirty years ago.
I let my sister-in-law talk me into standing outside K-Mart waiting for the doors to unlock.
I felt suffocated by the crowd when we all crammed through the doors.
Thank goodness no one stood in the path.Inside the store, people grabbed and slam dunked merchandise into their shopping carts.
I was pushed and shoved aside while frantic Christmas shoppers jerked merchandise out of my hands.
Finally, I walked out of the store without buying anything.
To me, this was the ugly side of Christmas and only verified Jim's mantra, "Christmas is too commercialized, and no one remembers what it's all about." The birth of Christ was less important than department store Santas.Jim was called "Scrooge" and "Grinch" because of his lack of enthusiasm for presents.
It was up to me to purchase all the gifts because he wanted no part of it.
Our anniversary is five days before Christmas and Jim always wanted to exchange our gifts on that day, but I always held back a few "Christmas presents." We married young and I had a lot of growing up to do before I finally admitted that Christmas had become a time of pressure for me and lacking in the "Merry" department.From the time our kids were small, we always celebrated Christmas on Christmas Eve.
After they were grown, we began to limit our gift giving to one small gift.
Men bring a gift for a man, and women bring a gift for a woman.
The first year we had the gift exchange, my youngest son said, "This is it, Mom.
Do not buy anything else!"  From that moment, I no longer had to worry about size or taste, want or need for any of the adults in the family.Then the grandkids were born.
Soon we were back to buying loads of presents.
Even Jim got involved in the search for toys to make their eyes light up.
Have you noticed how hard it is to buy for kids, especially when they get older?
The presents start getting more expensive and the kids more particular.
You begin to think you are throwing money at gifts that just get pushed to the back of the play room.A few years back, I begin to notice I was spending more and more money for fewer presents and didn't always feel good about my selections.
Then, I came up with an idea.
I began to buy my grandkids Certificates of Deposit for their education.
I still get them other gifts, but I don't feel like I have to buy them a "big" gift.
The big gift is something they won't outgrow or push aside after a few hours of play.Traditionally, my kids, grandkids, and a few special people come to my house on Christmas Eve.
My youngest son, Rob, makes his chili and we have a deli tray.
It is a relaxed, joyful celebration.
This year, Rob is on call and can't come.
He says that will be true for the next seven Christmases!
After throwing a few ideas around, my oldest son, Eric, suggested we have our celebration on the Saturday before Christmas.
It is such a brilliant plan that I couldn't imagine why I hadn't thought of it.The CDs are bought, I have my "woman's gift" and a few hours of leisurely shopping and I'll be done.
No Black Friday required!
I feel good about Christmas, and I know Jim would have liked our tradition upgrade.
After all, this year's gift exchange will be on the thirty-ninth anniversary of a Hawaiian wedding between a college student and an Army Sp/4 on R&R from Vietnam.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 23, 2008>
Thanksgiving is one of my favorite holidays, but for most people it just gets lost between Halloween and Christmas.
As soon as the Halloween costumes and decorations go on sale, Christmas carols fill store aisles with holly jolly holiday tunes.
The TV Guide is jam packed full of Christmas specials and Christmas music plays in about half the commercials.
A nearby town had their Christmas parade this weekend--a full week before Thanksgiving!Some people already have Christmas decorations up, but I'm still in autumn mode.
I don't want to skip Thanksgiving.
It's time to reflect on the things I'm thankful for.
The economic crisis has made me think about things I normally take for granted.
With my hemorrhaging 401K, I'm thankful I'm still employed.
With all the defaulted mortgages, I'm thankful my home is paid in full.I'm thankful none of the diets I've gone on have worked.
I have extra pounds to tide me over if I have to cut back on my grocery bill.
If I miss a few meals, I will be thankful to have an entire new wardrobe of "skinny" clothes in my closet.My car has more than 100,000 miles on it, but I'm thankful I do not have a car payment.
I'm thankful that gas prices have dropped, and I no longer feel like I need to take out a loan to fill my tank.
Maybe I can actually go somewhere now.When every bone in my body aches, I'm thankful that I'm not a herring.
(OK, that's an old joke and I "borrowed" it.
)I am most thankful that I have family and friends that I love.
I'm thankful my sons married terrific women and my four grandchildren are healthy.
I'm thankful my cat has to sleep from time to time and isn't climbing the walls twenty-four/seven.Maybe we just need to slow down a bit.
At least enough that we do not miss a holiday that only involves gathering family together and eating ourselves silly.
It reminds me of home, pumpkin pie, dressing, cranberries, and turkey.
How can people not love this holiday best of all?Thanksgiving does not have the pressure of Christmas.
No one expects us to put on our happy face and know the ideal gift to buy.
It is perfectly acceptable to be reflective and a bit pensive at Thanksgiving.
No one is forced to be merry and ho-ho-ho at every opportunity.
We can be ourselves at Thanksgiving without being called "Scrooge" or someone saying "Bah-Hum-Bug!"Have you ever noticed that people will ask you what you got for Christmas, but they won't ask you what you are thankful for on Thanksgiving?
We really aren't pressured to be thankful.I'm thankful that I'll be eating a turkey instead of being a turkey served as the main course on Thanksgiving Day.
Yes, everyone except turkeys can surely find something to be thankful for.
If nothing else, just be thankful that if you aren't thankful no one else will take it personally.
So have a happy turkey day if you want.
Be thankful, if you so desire.
But please, please don't forget Thanksgiving in your rush toward Christmas.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 16, 2008>
A good mystery book ends with the mystery being solved, but we go through life with a series of unsolved mysteries.
At any particular time in our lives, we puzzle over why things happen.Why did a relationship end?
Why do nations fight wars?
Why do people develop life-changing diseases like Alzheimer's?
The "whys" of real life mysteries can drive us berserk.Last night, I picked up the Sedalia Democrat and two front page headlines caught my immediate attention.
"Fundraiser planned for Bruce reward coffers" was an update on Dana Bruce, a 23 year old mother of two, who went missing on October 5.
Flyers with Dana's picture are posted at most Sedalia businesses.
Wooded areas have been searched and a person of interest interviewed, but Dana is still missing and nothing has been resolved.Another story on the front page "Missing wife's husband arrested" is about Michael Yarnell's arrest in connection with the disappearance of Michelle "Angie" Yarnell.
Twenty-eight year old Angie disappeared October 23, 2003 from the Ivy Bend area of Morgan County.
Angie's husband claimed she ran away with another man.
Michael Yarnell admits to sending a postcard to Angie's mother indicating that Angie was alive and well and on her way to Texas.
Where is Angie?
That question still can't be answered five years later.Hopefully, these mysteries will be solved eventually.
If family members do not have a happy reunion with their loved ones, they will at least find closure.
It seems that no matter how bad the news, we face the known with courage, but we fear the unknown.What were Dana's goals before she went missing?
What were Angie's dreams?
Whatever happened to these young women, their lives veered from the pathways they had traveled.
Their fates are unsolved mysteries.Why did Jim develop dementia?
What happened to our hopes and aspirations?
This is my life's greatest unsolved mystery.Life is not a book, and we are not the authors of our own pages.
Too many times, our biographies are cut short, and our legacy is an unfinished manuscript with a lot of loose ends.
Our pathways through life are mysterious, and we don't know exactly where they lead or when they will end.
We do our best to conquer our fear of the unknown and complete our journey with faith that in the end we learn the answers.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 8, 2008>
At work we are conducting our annual inventory.
I'm no longer directly involved in the process, but I remember the headaches, frustration, and anxiety of trying to reach an acceptable discrepancy between what you have on hand and what you should have.This morning, I have been cleaning house, and I thought about all the stuff that I have crammed into this house after eighteen years of living here.
I can't imagine taking inventory of all the items I own.
In the first place, I would have to find everything.
I'm still looking for the computer connection for my MP3 player.
If I ever find it, will it be in a logical place, or some place where I stuck it to get it out of the way?
It wouldn't get counted in the inventory if it's still missing.Jim used to call me Imelda Marcos Junior because of all the shoes I have.
The last time I counted (at his insistence!)
I had fifty pair.
As far as how many pair I have now--we won't go there.
I watch these people on TV help packrats like me clean their closets.
"You have a hundred tee-shirts?
Oh.
My.
God.
Throw ninety-seven of them in this big trash can and we will buy you a new wardrobe." Nope.
Keep your new wardrobe.
I like my memories.
I just need a bigger closet!If my 401K completely disappears, I could live by selling my stuff on E-Bay.
I wouldn't even miss most of my "inventory" for a few years.I no longer count my collectibles.
I display part of them and pack part of them away.
Seasonal decorating gets to be such a pain, that I wonder why I do it.
I need to take down Halloween and put up Thanksgiving.
Fortunately, those two overlap some.
I hate to take down my fiber-optic witch before anyone gets to see it.
Last year I left my decorations up for a few extra days and my granddaughter said, "Halloween is OVER, Grandma Linda!"Sometimes when I have a moment of quiet time, I begin to think strange thoughts.
Last night as I drove home, I began to think about things I've done in my life that I wish I hadn't.
Things that I knew were wrong, but plunged into them anyway.
I began to take inventory of my dark side.
When we ruminate, it's our failings that bear heavy on the soul and seem to clog up the inventory.
In fairness to myself, I should inventory my accomplishments and the good things too.I've always heard that we should count our blessings which sounds like another inventory.
Thankfully, I couldn't possibly inventory my blessings either.
Not even an industrial strength calculator would be capable of that task.So, at work, inventory is bogged down and holding up my October month end closing, but in my personal life, I'm just plugging along.
I'm the only one accountable for any discrepancies between what I have and what I should have, and more importantly, the person I am and the person I should be.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 2, 2008>
Branson celebrates "Veterans Week" out of respect for those who served our country.
For several years, Jim and I traveled to Branson for this annual event.
Patriotic songs are performed by talented people dressed in glittering red, white, and blue costumes.Our first stop in Branson was always the 76 Music Hall where we registered Jim for his ARMY, 169th Engineers, Vietnam nametag.
Until we began to celebrate Veterans Week in Branson, Jim had not experienced the pride associated with fighting for his country.
Jim and I both had tears in our eyes when a man saw Jim's nametag and shook his hand.
"I just want to say thank you, and welcome home." Vietnam veterans returned home one at a time on commercial airlines--no parades, no thank you, no appreciation.Vietnam irrevocably changed Jim.
He felt more stigmatized than honored for most of the years following his tour of duty.
Jim suffered from post traumatic syndrome before anyone knew what it was.
He became withdrawn, suicidal, paranoid, and sank into a dark depression.
Eventually, he received psychiatric treatment and with medication improved.
Yet, throughout the remainder of his life, Vietnam was a burden on his soul.At a Country Tonite show, one of the performers sang, "All Gave Some, and Some Gave All." Most people probably think of the soldiers who died on the battlefield as the ones who "gave all."  Jim stood beside me in the darkened theatre, his solemn face changing colors because of the flashing stage lights.
As I held his hand, my arm brushing against the denim of his Levi jacket, I knew in my heart that Jim was one who gave all.Today, my sister-in-law and I visited the Veterans Cemetery in Higginsville to place red, white, and blue flowers in front of Jim's niche in the columbarium.
The cemetery, peaceful and quiet, beneath a cloudless blue sky, is in stark contrast to sweaty soldiers carrying M-16s through a Southeast Asian jungle.How many will pause on November 11 to honor our veterans?
Or has Veterans Day simply become another excuse for retail stores to have a sale?
I know that in Branson, at least, veterans will be thanked, honored, and welcomed home with a parade that begins at the 11th hour, of the 11th day, of the 11th month.As long as our country sends troops throughout the world to fight in wars, it is our obligation to provide support to veterans for as long as they need it.
Outer wounds are visible, but scars on the heart may be the deepest.
All gave some and some gave all to keep the stars and strips flying high and proud over this country.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 26, 2008>
Those of you who read my posts on a regular basis know that I'm always up to something.
My hectic lifestyle allows me to sample a smorgasbord of new experiences and gives me ample opportunity to make mistakes.
I believe that mistakes are the most powerful teachers I've ever had.At Alzheimer's Support Group, the best advice I can give to people who are just beginning the dementia journey is to tell them what to avoid, or "not do." I hope others can learn from the mistakes I made during my ten years of caregiving.
Some of life's greatest lessons are the result of mistakes, and it's always better if we don't have to make them ourselves.An incident this week reinforced my belief that I am never too old to learn.
First, I learned that it is a bad idea to decorate a food table with tea lights although it makes the petite sandwiches, fruit and vegetable laden table, lovely.
I also learned that paper napkins are quite flammable and when someone reaches for food and dangles a paper napkin over a burning candle, fire happens.This leads to another lesson: a lace tablecloth can catch fire quickly if a blazing napkin comes into contact with it.
Before the tablecloth reaches the flash point, you need to knock the napkin off the table and onto the tile floor and stomp it.
I learned that burning napkins totally disintegrate and leave only a few pieces of ash and a scorch mark on tile.The only way to know if you pass the final exam for all the lessons you learn in life is whether you can brush the ashes off the floor and press onward.
Did you know that Comet cleanser removes tell-tale yellow scorch marks from a tile floor?
I didn't know that, but someone else had already learned that lesson.
We can't always "erase" our mistakes with Comet, but we can't let the fear of making them hold us back.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 18, 2008>
I went to our local Liberty Center last night with a group of BPW ladies to watch the Buddy Holly Story.
The day that he, The Big Bopper and Ritchie Valens died in an airplane that took off in a snow storm from Clear Lake, Iowa, is referred to as the "day the music died".
The play begins with a man, hat pulled low, playing an acoustic guitar and singing about the day the music died.
Buddy Holly takes the stage and plays a Fender guitar that immediately reminds me of Jim's 1952 Fender Telecaster.
In a scene I found particularly poignant, Buddy picks up a guitar and sings a song just for his wife.Unless you have been personally serenaded, you do not understand the intimacy of a song meant just for you.
Certain songs Jim played were always meant for me regardless of how many people were in the room.
Some of the special songs were Buck Owens's version of "Cinderella" and Elvis Presley's "Tender Feelings." These songs expressed Jim's own philosophy and capacity to love.
He would strum his guitar and sing, "There wasn't any palace and you weren't a queen, In your faded cotton dresses anyone could see...but you're still Cinderella to me." Another Elvis song he sang for me was, "Come take what I offer you, and kiss me tenderly, and you will be forever young, and beautiful, to me."I don't remember the last time Jim sang a special song for me.
I don't remember the date or the year.
He lost his songs one-by-one but I remember one June day in 1999, he picked up his Fender Telecaster and played Buckaroo without a flaw.
Jim's music didn't die in one tragic day--it faded away over ten years.When I watched the play last night, I was reminded of Jim saying, "Waylon Jennings was supposed to be on the plane, but he gave up his seat to Ritchie Valens." When you think about the talented people killed on that plane, you can't help but feel a sense of loss.
How high would those young and upcoming stars have risen with their careers?In a sense, the singers killed February 2, 1959, have been immortalized in movies, plays, and with their recordings.
They died, but their music didn't--only the music that could have been.The show symbolizes loss, with the man returning to the stage, hat pulled low as he sings about the day the music died.
The lights go low and Bart Kuhns as Buddy Holly returns to the stage to sing a rousing rendition of "Johnny B. Good".
The show ends with the audience on their feet, clapping and smiling.That's the way life should be.
Instead of crying over what could have been, we need to rejoice in the music that lives in our hearts.
The music only dies when we let it.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 12, 2008>
The world economic meltdown has endangered a lot of retirement dreams.
Wall Street hit Main Street when American workers lost $2 trillion in retirement savings.
Hardest hit are Baby Boomers who watch 401k's turn into 201k's.
My 401k has lost more than $30,000 this month.
I'm sure that's only peanuts to a CEO who draws a multi-million dollar salary, but where I come from, $30,000 is a lot of money.Those of us who believed "diversified" retirement portfolios would help us weather hard economic times have been rudely awakened to a new reality.
Not only are stocks going down, but our safety net, bonds, are losing value too.
In our efforts to out earn inflation, we fell victim to the fickle stock index.I have always put as much as I could into my 401k because I want a secure retirement.
The money that went down the tubes could have bought a lot of things.
Not that I really need anything I don't have.
My home is eighteen years old, but it doesn't have a mortgage.
My car has more than 100,000 miles, but I own it.I have chosen not to let my shrinking 401k ruin my life.
I'll be OK in my retirement.
It just may be a lot farther in the future than I thought it would be.
Or, it may not be as financially stable as I planned it to be.
It irritates me that I put money aside for almost thirty years to see it become the incredibly shrinking fund.
Irritates me, but does not depress me, or scare me.
I grew up poor, and I have no fear of poverty.
I really don't want or desire a lot of material items.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average and the S&P 500 will not dash my dreams!This is the second time I've made major mental adjustments to my retirement expectations.
The first time was when Jim developed dementia, and I realized we were not going to grow old together.
Jim's retirement dream was to purchase a motor home and travel.Now I plan to enjoy the peace and quiet of home with occasional trips to the Rocky Mountains, the Oregon Coast, or other places that pique my interest.
I want to spend a lot of time with my family and have more time to write--neither of which is costly.
I can still retain ninety percent of my retirement dream irregardless of what happens in the stock market.
Home-brewed coffee on my deck sounds good to me and costs only a fraction of Starbucks.
I look forward to my share of total relaxation, deep breaths of fresh air and sunshine, squirrel and bird watching.
With slight adjustments, futures are looking up for retirement.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 4, 2008>
Do you believe in ghosts?
Recently, I answered a survey about ghosts in the affirmative: "Yes, I believe in ghosts." More than 70% of the people answering the survey said the same thing.
Enough strange things have happened in my life that I don't scoff at the idea.
Jim always explained weird things by saying, "It's just harmless poltergeist."September 30 was one of those days when strange things happened to me.
It was the anniversary of my dad's death, and he died on the anniversary of his dad.
As I left the gym, my thoughts turned to a friend of mine who had died in 2005 and how a Rod Stewart song makes me think of him.
I always seem to hear the song on his birthday and the anniversary of his death.
I just realized the date had passed and I hadn't heard it this year.
I turned left on 65 Highway a few minutes later and the song came on the radio.
That's creepy, I thought.I drove home and walked into my house to discover a plastic bag in front of my coffee pot.
Oh, Ginger must have left something for me.
Curious, I picked up the neatly folded bag and looked inside.
It was my cat's medicine which is normally on top of the refrigerator in a basket.
I called Ginger, "Did you put Katrina's medicine on my counter?""No, I haven't been in your house today."I felt prickles on the back of my neck.
"I don't know how it got there," I said, "but this is weird." I walked through the rest of the house and didn't see anything else disturbed.I called my son, "Were you in my house today?""No, why?" I told him my story about finding the cat's medicine on the counter where it hadn't been when I checked my coffee pot just before I left for work."Could Katrina have knocked it off the refrigerator?"He knows how Katrina climbs and although she once managed to break one of my light fixtures, even she couldn't have gotten something off the refrigerator and folded it neatly on the counter across the room."Oh, Mom, you probably took the medicine down and got interrupted."About that time, a loud knock startled me.
It was Ginger.
She and I checked all the doors and they were all still locked, with deadbolts in place."I know I didn't get that medicine down!" I said.
"This is creeping me out.
Why would someone come in my house and put Katrina's medicine on the counter?"Ginger said, "This is creeping me out too!""Well, it wasn't Jim," I said.
Jim always reminded me to give the dogs their medicine.
"I didn't find Katrina until after he died.
And it wasn't my Dad because he didn't like cats."So how did the medicine get on the counter?
The logical explanation is, I did it, but don't remember doing it.
Does this mean I have short term memory loss?Which is truly scarier--short term memory loss or poltergeist?
...Does anyone have a phone number for Ghost Busters?
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 27, 2008>
Did some event happen that made you realize your life was irrevocably changed?
What is your story of that moment?Each morning of my life, I have awakened with confidence that life will plug along on an even keel.
Without warning, a few simple questions changed the course of my family's lives.Jim and I were at our local Nissan dealer to co-sign a loan for our son.
The dealer, Kevin, asked Jim his social security number and after a few moments, Jim said, "I can't remember it." Jim knew his social security number well because it had been his service number for three years in the U.S. Army.
It surpised me that Jim couldn't recall the number, but it didn't concern me because I have glitches with numbers all the time.
I gave Kevin Jim's social security number.Then, Kevin asked Jim his birth date.
Jim said, "I guess I don't know that either."That was when we began our journey.
A family in the United States begins that journey every 71 seconds.
The Alzheimer's Association estimates that more than 500,000 people in the U.S. have dementia that began before age 65, or early onset dementia.For several months, I have worked on the Early Onset Project.
My objective is to collect stories to create awareness of early onset dementia.
I need approximately thirty-five true stories to complete the book.
My plan is to have three sections: In Their Own Words (people with dementia), Care Partner Stories (for primary caregivers) and Family, Friends, and Professional's Stories.Although I extended the deadline to October 31, I do not have enough submissions.
I know it's hard to take time to write a story, but consider how much your slice-of-life story can benefit other people who have just begun the Alzheimer's journey.Writing life stories is therapeutic for the author.
It is amazing how committing your challenges to paper can begin emotional healing.
I knew this instinctively, but research supports the beneficial effects of therapeutic writing.
Dr. James Pennebaker's studies have shown positive emotional and physical benefits for people who wrote about traumatic experiences for fifteen minutes, four to seven consecutive days.
The participants were instructed to write their emotional reaction to the traumatic event without regard to grammar or spelling.
This writing can be kept completely personal and never shared with anyone.
Most participants found that by the end of the study period their writing had developed into a story.Try it and you will be amazed at how easy it is to write a slice-of-life story and how cathartic the process will be.
If you want to contribute the story to the Early Onset Project, email it to earlyonset(at)hotmail.com.Watch for a publication date announcement for: Writing as Therapy: Rocks and Pebbles by L. S. Fisher. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 22, 2008>
Sometimes you are better off when you don't get what you wish for.
We had wished for our Memory Walk to be last weekend, but settled for this weekend instead.
What a difference a week makes!
Last Saturday I was flooded in, but Memory Walk day couldn't have been more perfect if the request had gone straight from our lips to God's ears.It's been a busy weekend.
We began on Thursday evening with Bank Day.
Besides collecting team money, we put together goody bags and handed out tee-shirts.
Friday, I introduced our new coordinator, Lisa, to the fine art of schmoozing.
This is a long-standing tradition with our Sedalia Memory Walk.
We visit our corporate sponsors bearing gifts.
It shows our appreciation and reminds everyone of the upcoming event.Friday was a good day.
Lisa and I solved our last two remaining problems: (1) ice and water and (2) balloons for our balloon release.
When Wal-Mart gave us a gift card, we solved Problem #1 and knew we could buy water and ice the next morning.
Problem #2 was balloons for our balloon release.
I knew from past experience that inflating the balloons, tying them off, and hauling them around is not a job for sissies.
Balloons and Tunes quoted Lisa fifty cents a balloon.
For $25 we bought fifty white and purple balloons ready for flight.Saturday morning, festive music played in the background, and Don the balloon man made magical animal figures and hats for children of all ages ranging from a few months to 96 years.
We served breakfast snacks with coffee and plenty of iced down beverages.
Center Stage Dance Academy performed three delightful dances that lived up to the slogan on their shirts: "Dance Like Everyone is Watching."We began our walk to "I Like to Move It" from Madagascar and finished our mile to "Chariots of Fire." After the Walk, we gave away door prizes and awarded the two traveling trophies to Fairview.
Lisa handed out balloons and with a purple marker, we wrote names of the loved ones we wanted to honor."Whose name would you like on your balloon?" I asked Connie from Fairview Nursing Home.
Jim's Team and Fairview have been long-time friendly rivals for the trophies.
As a former coordinator, I truly appreciate their commitment to Memory Walk."Put Jim's name on it," she said.
I wrote his name and drew a heart around it.The music keyed up and fifty balloons soared to "I Will Remember You, Will You Remember Me?" Some of the balloons flew toward the heavens and some caught in the upper branches of a stately tree."Those are the ones who are still with us," my Aunt Labetta said.
Before the song was finished, most of the balloons slipped on through the tree and disappeared into the bluest sky possible.
Tears flowed for our loved ones lost to the disease.
We will always remember them with love, even when they don't remember us.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 13, 2008>
Today, slate skies are gushing rain onto Mid-Missouri.
Ike is pushing inward and brings more of the same for next few days.
The NOAH weather station on my weather alert radio spews out county after county with flash flood and tornado warnings.
The days are getting shorter, and not just because autumn is nigh.My days seem shorter because I've got more to do than time to do it.
When I look around at other people, I see the same scenario played over and over.
Life is hectic and the days aren't long enough.I work four ten-hour days each week.
My "Day Off" To-Do List is jam packed with items.
Some days, I barely scratch the surface.
Weekends fly by and my list gets longer yet.
My calendar for this month has events for every weekend--sometimes for Friday night, Saturday, and Sunday.
This is a month with two family reunions, Memory Walk, writing, speaking engagements, radio/TV interviews, the BPW Chicken Dinner, writers' guild, support group, fundraising for three different groups, and more.
Whew!
No wonder the days seem too short.The dreary weather depresses me and makes me anxious.
Our Memory Walk is next weekend and I pray for sunny skies.
So much needs to be done before the walk and the morning of the walk.
I have nightmares about downpours and no walkers.
We will not cancel the walk for rain, but rain changes the entire dynamics of the event.I may grouse about the constant rain, but I'm not complaining about the short days.
The big advantage is that while the days are too short, they are full and fulfilling.
Would I trade my short busy days for long leisurely ones?
No, BUT I might be willing to swap some of them.
A little down time seems like a dream come true.
I would like to read a book, watch TV, and eat chocolate bonbons.
I would be especially interested in a week on a tropical island--without a hurricane.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 6, 2008>
My phone rang at twenty minutes after midnight earlier this week.
Of course, I was sound asleep so it took a few rings before my brain could interpret the sound and direct my hand to pick up the receiver.
When I realized it was the phone, my first thought was Oh, my God, someone has died.Instead of my mother, the normal bearer of sad tidings, I heard a recorded voice say, "This is Excel Bank, and we are notifying you that your debit card has been suspended.
To speak to a representative about this matter ..." OK. I've been awakened out of a sound sleep and I think someone has stolen my identity and ransacked my checking account.
Then the practical side of my brain reminds me that my friend Arlene at Excel Bank would never call me in the middle of the night, so I hung up the phone.The next day, the big news story is about the deluge of calls to everyone in Sedalia with an 826 prefix.
Some of the people who received the calls were not, and had never been, Excel Bank customers.
The scam artists even called the sheriff at his home and the Sedalia Police Department.
Had I followed the directions, I would have been instructed to key in my account and pin number.Ten years ago, I might have been tricked into giving someone sensitive information over the phone or on the Internet, but now I've learned to ignore urgent email requests about problems with various accounts--Amazon, E-Bay, bank, etc.
I never click on "You Won!
You are our 1,000,000th Customer" or "You won the Canadian lottery!"When Jim and I first used the ATM, I could never remember the assigned number so he always had to key it in.
Several years later, when he was in the early stages of dementia, Jim couldn't consistently remember the secret number.
One day I was at work and a teller at the bank called."There's a man at the drive-up window who says he's your husband.
He tried to get money out of your account at the ATM, but couldn't remember the pin number.""Did he want $30?" I asked.
Jim always withdrew exactly $30 and that amount would be verification of his identity as far as I was concerned."Yes, he did.
We had him send in his driver's license, and then couldn't decide if it was really him.""Oh, it's Jim.
Go ahead and give him the money." The teller thought someone had stolen Jim's identity.
In reality, Jim was losing his identity to dementia--one memory, one skill, at a time.Our identities are our most important possession because it is a mirror of our inner selves and values.
When someone steals an identity, they have already demonstrated a flawed character.
I don't want to be bilked out of my hard earned money by a thief.
Still, I would much rather lose dollars than my identity.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 30, 2008>
Labor Day weekend has traditionally been one of my busiest weekends.
Is that a paradox?
I would think the purpose of the holiday is so people like me who have worked the greater part of our lives could relax, picnic, and basically rest on our laurels.This is family reunion weekend for Jim's family, my family now.
We meet at the biggest shelter at Liberty Park.
When I first attended the family reunion, the Fishers played music and sang.
People wandered in from all other shelters in the park to listen to the music.Sometimes we've huddled in our coats, and I remember my father-in-law, Bill, building a fire in the fireplace to ward off the chill.
We've been there in rain, thunder storms, suffocating heat, and once in awhile, absolutely perfect weather.Jim's mom, Virginia, used to bake dozens of her delicious light rolls and cook a big pot of beans.
We all look forward to Dinah's chicken and noodles and Ginger's potato salad.
Along with pies, cookies, and brownies, we've had birthday and anniversary cakes.Jim always looked forward to the reunion.
We were usually at the park by 9:00 a.m. so he could set up microphones and amplifiers.
The last time he went to the reunion, I picked him up at the nursing home.
It was not a good day and not a good idea.
He became upset and remained that way for days.The older you get the more bittersweet family reunions become.
It's great to see family you haven't seen since the last time, but you can't help but feel sad about the ones who will never be at the Liberty Park reunion again.
A new generation has taken over and those of us who have held to the tradition see our grandchildren play on the swings, slides, and merry-go-rounds.
Once it was our children.
Life goes on and laughter rings out as we celebrate the bond of family.I wonder if when the younger generation plays music tomorrow I will hear echoes of other reunions.
If I think of how Uncle Charles always called me his "sweetie." Will I hear the ring of horseshoes clanking on the post, and Jim's laughter as he shares a joke with Uncle Orvie?When we pack up our Crockpots and pass around goodbye hugs, we are already looking forward to next year, seeing old acquaintances, and greeting new family members.
After all, why are we in the labor force, if not for family?
So maybe the illogical way to spend the day is in seclusion totally relaxed.However you spend your Labor Day, I hope it is worthy of a weekend that celebrates a full and productive life.
Part of life is work, but the all consuming part of life is family and being with the people you love.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 24, 2008>
Linda Newkirk, the executive director at the Alzheimer's Association Mid-Missouri Chapter, joined me on KDRO, a local radio station, for a program called Open Mike.
We talked about Alzheimer's disease and our local Memory Walk.I don't know how many people are awake at 8:00 a.m. on a Saturday to listen, but it is a popular program.
It gave us a golden opportunity to talk about the September 20 Sedalia Memory Walk and to let people know about the Chapter's services.I call myself the Alzheimer's Association Poster Child.
I've benefited from my acquaintance with the great staff at the Mid-Missouri Chapter since my initial contact when Jim first developed symptoms.
The Alzheimer's Association symbol used to be two people leaning into the "H" of the word Alzheimer's.
The slogan was "Someone to stand by you." The logo has now changed to a stylistic symbol of a brain and a beaker, which represents the Alzheimer's Association dual mission to support people living with the disease (and their caregivers) and research to find a cure for Alzheimer's disease.
The symbol has changed, like so many things do, but the heart beat of the organization is the same.What qualifies me to be a poster child?
My first contact with the Mid-Missouri Chapter was through a call to the 24 hour/7 day a week HELP line and, yes, I was connected automatically to my own chapter.
I read every word of the literature they sent me and the Chapter newsletter.
The only financial help I received for respite care was from the Alzheimer's Association.
They were the only ones who didn't say Jim was too young to qualify.
I registered Jim with Safe Return when he began to wander off.
I attended educational programs that helped me develop caregiver strategies and learn more about dementia.
Support Group was invaluable to me, and I can't imagine why everyone doesn't gather strength from others who know exactly what they are going through.
I became an advocate and talked to my legislators on Memory Day and at the Public Policy Forum in Washington DC.
I learned even more about the dedication of everyone involved at the Mid-Missouri Chapter during my six years as a Board Member.
I developed friendships with staff, board members, other caregivers, and amazing people living with Alzheimer's.
Jim and I participated in the 1998 Memory Walk with five other people and one dog.
I followed that up with five years of being the Coordinator of the Sedalia Memory Walk.
Our walk grew to embrace the entire community.
As fulfilling as that experience was, I turned it over to Shelley who did a terrific job for the next four years.
This year we have a new inexperienced coordinator and she is struggling.
So, when they asked me to go on Open Mike, I was happy to talk about our Memory Walk.
It was my baby, and I want it to continue to grow strong and healthy.On the radio, Linda Newkirk and I talked about how Alzheimer's affects entire families and how Memory Walk allows individuals to make a difference.
Saturday, September 20, Sedalia will be on the MOVE to end Alzheimer's.Each September, Jim's Team honors his memory at the Sedalia Memory Walk.
This is our time to give back to the organization with "the compassion to care, the leadership to conquer."_______________________________________The Sedalia Memory Walk is September 20, at the Highway Gardens on the Missouri State Fairgrounds.
Registration begins at 8:30 and the one-mile stroll begins at 10:00.
You can register at www.alz.org/Mid-Missouri or email me at lfisher@lsfisher.com.Do you know when and where the Memory Walk closest to you takes place?
You can go to www.alz.org, to search by state for your local Chapter's Memory Walk schedule.
Lace up your walking shoes and support the 5.2 million Americans with Alzheimer's.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 17, 2008>
I'm still on a bit of a high three days after the Alzheimer's Association OK/Ark Chapter's educational symposium at Fort Smith.
I was thrilled to finally meet Cheryl, Bob, and Jordan after months of emails setting up my two presentations.Ft.
Smith is a town that welcomes visitors with open hearts.
Mayor Baker proclaimed August 14 "Linda Fisher Day" and presented me with the "Key to the Frontier." The town motto is "Life is worth living in Ft. Smith!"The day's program began with "Writing as Therapy: Rocks and Pebbles" at the first general session.
After a few opening remarks, I managed to knock over my glass of water and watch as my notes blurred into a soggy mess.
It didn't make any difference because I'm such a believer in the therapeutic benefits of writing that the notes are primarily to keep me on schedule.I gave the keynote, "Alzheimer's Can Happen at Any Age," following the awards presentations.
It may have not been an accident that all the breakables had been removed from the podium area prior to my presentation.The Alzheimer's Association offered a variety of programs to give family and professional caregivers skills and encouragement to continue with their important missions.
Dr. Ed McMahon's session on "Non-Pharmacologic Interventions" gave examples of how thinking outside the box can benefit people with dementia.
Sandy Warmack and Jean Cosgrove facilitated a work shop called "It's all the Rage." Earplugs and rolled up construction paper helped us understand the limitations of a person with Alzheimer's.
Several other concurrent sessions were offered, but these were the ones I attended.The educational symposium energized the participants and motivated them to be the best caregivers they can be.
The positive feedback I received made me realize how important it is to share my years of caregiving experience with others who are beginning this journey.No matter how much it may seem that way, life is never all bad.
Moments of joy penetrate our saddest moments.
It may be a smile, a touch, or a look that says "I remember" too.
Sometimes I am amazed that I walked into the long dark tunnel through the land of dementia and emerged on the other side alive, happy, and optimistic.
Most important, life is still worth living in Ft. Smith and in your hometown.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 9, 2008>
Some people think I'm insane when they see my calendar.
Others just think I don't realize each day has only 24 hours.
Sometimes, I find myself double booked.
Last Monday night I had two meetings at the same exact time, across town from each other.
Just cancel one?
Oh, heavens, no!
I went to my BPW board meeting first, and then to the other, longer Memory Walk planning meeting.Thursday night, I had a dinner meeting, on the opening day of the State Fair.
After the meeting adjourned, three of us went to the fair and caught the end of the Air Supply concert.
Who says you can't do it all?Friday was my day off, but my plans for the day: work a few hours, eat grilled hamburgers at the going-away lunch for our summer employee, and make my 1:15 appointment at W-K Chevrolet to get my oil changed.
And then, what the heck, I might as well go to Brian's Gym for a workout.
Not a problem.
Except, I got sick Thursday night.
I'll spare you the gross details, but I was violently ill. Kind of reminded me of the time I had food poisoning.
That time, Jim hauled me into to the emergency room.
After waiting two hours and no doctor in sight, I decided if I was going to die, I would much rather die at home in my own bathroom than the hospital's public restroom.I spent Friday totally wiped out.
I slept, drank a little water, ate a few bites of bread, slept, called and cancelled everything, slept, and slept.
By evening, I felt better so I stayed awake for a few hours, and then went to bed and slept through the night.
When my alarm went off this morning--yes, I know it's Saturday but I had a conference to attend--thankfully, I had slept off my illness.
Late this afternoon on the way home, I stopped by work and finished the reports I planned on doing yesterday.Have I always been like this?
No!
I became possessed after ten years of being a caregiver.
All primary caregivers of loved ones with Alzheimer's know about the 36 Hour Day.
As crazy as my calendar is, it is still calm compared to that of a caregiver.I'm not sure what happened to the person I once was, but I think she evaporated into a puff of smoke.
What happened to the days when I couldn't find enough to do?
What happened to curling up with a book on a rainy day?
What happened to my own personal concerts with Jim singing and playing his Fender guitar?Early onset dementia changed everything.
I'm not the person I used to be, and I will never be that person again.
I will never take life or love for granted.Double booked?
So what?
At least I'm not triple booked.
Often.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 2, 2008>
Researchers are not only trying to find a cure for Alzheimer's, they want to improve quality of life and improve the standard of care for people with dementia.
The results of an ongoing study released at the 2008 Alzheimer's Association International Conference on Alzheimer's Disease (ICAD) involves communication.
Researchers used "Elderspeak" to define a communication method similar to a parent using baby-talk phrases such as, "Sweetie pie, it's time for us to get up now" or "That's a no-no!" This study validates what we caregivers knew all along: Our loved ones with dementia are adults and need to be treated with respect.During the study, resistance to care was measured in relationship to dementia care unit staff's communication with the residents.
The communication styles were broken down into normal talk, elderspeak, and silence.
The study shows that it is significantly more effective to talk to residents in normal conversation than elderspeak.
Silence was neutral.Jim developed aphasia early in his disease and we learned to cope with his diminishing grasp of spoken and written communication.
In effect, my unscientific study spanned ten years.
I never used baby talk, but it was perfectly acceptable for me to call Jim by endearments because I always had.
In fact, one time when I addressed him as "Jim" in front of our kids, they both giggled because they had NEVER heard either one of us call the other by name.
Yet, I know that once Jim was in the nursing home, he had to cringe when staff called him by an intimate endearment reserved for use by people who loved him.When a person's spoken language is limited, and they are ordered to do something in an unkind tone, or treated like a child, they will react in the only way they can--by resisting.
This resistance is looked upon as "behavior" and reflects upon the resident rather than the staff.Some states require dementia specific training with communication as one of the elements.
The results of this study should be reason enough for long term care facilities to go above and beyond any state laws in improving communication between staff and residents.
When a resident resists care, it is stressful for staff and increases the time required to complete a task.Using respectful communication methods is a win-win situation whether your loved one is at home or in long term care.
Proper training allows staff to perform at an efficient level, and residents will be more cooperative.
Family caregivers can benefit from the knowledge that their communication style can greatly impact their caregiving success.Source: Respectful Adult Communications Improves Quality of Care in Alzheimer's at http://www.alz.org/.
The study conducted by Kristine N. Williams, RN, PhD, and the University of Kansas School of Nursing was funded by the National Institute of Health.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 28, 2008>
Jim and I used to go to Branson several times a year.
Now, I make the trip with friends, my mom, sister, or my grandchildren.
Last weekend, I traveled with my grandchildren.Along Highway 65 on our trip, we hit road construction.
Warning signs were posted: Road Construction, One Lane Ahead, Expect Delays.
A flagman held a STOP sign.
We waited in a line of vehicles while north bound traffic traversed several miles of a single lane.
While we waited our turn, a blue Chevy pickup behind me swerved into the other lane, the driver's head bobbing like an out-of-control bobble head doll as she contemplated whether the STOP sign applied to her.The north bound cars dwindled, and we proceeded on our way at a speedy 45 miles per hour.
Past the one-lane road, the signs  read No Center Stripe.
This sign means so much more than it says.
It's obvious that the road has no center stripe.
But too many drivers, like the lady in the Chevy truck, have no concept of why the sign is there.
Suddenly, you don't have the Missouri Department of Transportation tell you which areas are unsafe for passing.
You actually have to use common sense.Ms.
Bobble Head continued to swerve around, debating on passing me so she could be stuck behind the semi in front of me.
Fortunately for her, traffic was heavy enough that on-coming cars prevented her from risking her life, and ours, in a foolish attempt to pass where the road department will surely paint yellow lines.Of course, the grandchildren and I were not happy about the delay on our trip to Branson and Silver Dollar City, but that's summer in Missouri.
Life is like a highway without a center stripe, and we can expect delays along our journey.
Every day we make decisions that can affect the remainder of our lives, and those decisions often affect others.
We just need to use common sense, and watch out for the bobble heads.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 20, 2008>
Although I'm a writer and speaker, I continue to work at my day job for those little necessities like food and health insurance.
My job as an office manager is fulfilling and challenging enough to hold my interest.
We work ten-hour days with an hour lunch break.
Sometimes, it seems that my brain is "out to lunch" during that one hour of theoretical down time in the middle of the day.Friday, just as I was ending the work week, I decided to eat at the office and work on an article and story with looming deadlines.
I walked back to the kitchen, removed my Schwan's Broccoli-Chicken and Rice Bowl and popped it into the microwave.
Rather than waste six minutes while I waited for it to cook, I grabbed a glass of ice water and returned to my desk, popped in my flash drive, and began to write.The problem with healthy food is sometimes it just doesn't stick with you.
At three o'clock I was famished, and just as I reached for my apple, I realized my lunch was still in the microwave.
I never thought I would live long enough to forget to eat!
HereI am, a master of multi-tasking, and forgot to eat lunch.Last week, I rushed from my hair appointment through a drive-thru window at Goody's.
I bypassed the "Order Here" menu and drove to the "Pick up Order" window.
Just as I was contemplating backing up, the window opened and a grinning man said, "Could I have your order, please?""I can't believe I didn't stop and place my order.""It happens," he said, "people just have their minds on something else."I didn't tell him this was an improvement over the fiasco at the same restaurant last year.
That time, I ordered at the proper window, paid for my food, and drove off with only my drink.
I'm sure I was thinking about more important things than lunch.My friend, Tracy Mobley, diagnosed at 38 with early-onset dementia, has something to say about people like me who have so much on their plates that their brains are out to lunch.
She says, "They are quick to say, 'Oh, I do those things.' I truly wish this disease were as forgiving and forgetting as they make it seem."Well said, Tracy!
When Jim developed dementia, I realized how serious and life-changing Alzheimer's really is.
He began a process that could be described as unlearning.Our lives are so hectic today that we often find ourselves with our brain on one track, and our actions on auto pilot.
This mental overload is not Alzheimer's, but simply a brain trying to process too much information.The lesson for me is to hang a mental "Out to Lunch" sign during my lunch break and spend my time more wisely.
I need to take a deep breath and slow down.
If I meet friends for lunch or go to the park and relax for an hour, I bet I wouldn't forget to eat.
*****For information on Memory Talk presentations, visit http://www.lsfisher.com/, and click on the Alzheimer's Speaker link.
Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love available at Barnesandnoble.com, Amazon.com, and selected Missouri Barnes and Noble stores.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 12, 2008>
"I want to go to the Memory Walk because I'm having trouble with my memory," Jim said.
He had spotted a small ad about the upcoming walk in the Sedalia Democrat.
I hadn't mentioned the walk but had already registered and raised $400.
I thought Jim wouldn't want to go because it was for Alzheimer's.When the doctor told Jim he had probable Alzheimer's, Jim's reaction was, "I guarantee you, I do NOT have THAT!" I didn't want to believe it either, but what began as memory glitches had developed into gaping deficits.
By Memory Walk time, Jim was on Aricept, but it made him sick and he resented taking an Alzheimer's drug.We arrived at Liberty Park, expecting a crowd of walkers.
We joined Helen and Chuck from Slater, Penny and Joetta from the Mid-Missouri Chapter, and Penny's German shepherd, Vicky, beneath the small shelter.Helen, an energetic, vivacious 70ish woman had organized the walk because the Association couldn't find anyone in Sedalia to do it.
She toted a hunter's horn, and was raring to go.We received tee-shirts, sweatshirts, caps, cups, and water bottles.
I donned my purple tee-shirt, but Jim insisted on wearing his cowboy hat and denim shirt.
We waited.
Walk time arrived, and no one else showed up.Our small group headed toward the downtown area.
Helen blew her horn, and we collected donations from the few people we met on the street and most of the downtown businesses.
It was hot, and Jim began to sweat, but he was a real trouper and wanted to continue the walk.
Helen swooped into the VFW Hall on Ohio Street.
The veterans asked her to blow her hunter's horn, and the sound bugled throughout the building.Jim collected the largest donation of the day from Wilken's Music Store, where he was a regular customer.
He was excited about people giving us contributions and with no concept of the value of money, pocket change was just as exciting to him as ten-dollar bills.
In all, the Sedalia Walk earned about $600 that yearThe Mid-Missouri Chapter asked me to organize the 1999 walk.
I had never been involved in community service, and this was a giant step for me.
The Sedalia Memory Walks were successful initially due to family support.
Eventually the walk was embraced by our entire community.
My passion carried me through five years as coordinator.
Our six walkers mushroomed into 444 walkers who contributed $36,000.The decision to become the Memory Walk Coordinator changed my life.
Throughout Jim's illness, being an Alzheimer's Association volunteer gave me a sense of purpose and became my lifeline.
The Mid-Missouri Chapter staff and Board gave me a Kleenex to dry my eyes and inspired me on my life's greatest mission.
Over the past ten years, I've been a primary caregiver, a support group facilitator, an Alzheimer's Board Member and Assembly Delegate, a spokesperson, and active advocate for people with Alzheimer's and their families.I'm not telling you these things so you will think I'm a giving person; I have received so much more than I've ever given.
Jim developing early onset dementia was my life's greatest heartbreak, but this tragedy gave birth to my greatest blessings.Being an Alzheimer's volunteer, I've met amazing people, made life-long friends, and had opportunities I never dreamed could be possible.
I share my experiences through Memory Talk presentations and book projects.
I see sunshine breaking through the giant shadow of Alzheimer's.Every journey begins with one step, so make sure your step is in the right direction.
May you walk the Memory Walk and talk the Memory Talk to make the world better for the 5.2 million Americans with Alzheimer's.
*****To find a Memory Walk near you, call your local Alzheimer's Association Chapter or visit http://www.alz.org/ and click on your state on the map.
You don't have to be an athlete.
Our top fundraiser for years called all her friends and never left her home.
If you prefer email, the Alzheimer's Association's Kintera makes fundraising easy.For information on Memory Talk presentations, visit http://www.lsfisher.com/, and click on the Alzheimer's Speaker link.
Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love available at Barnesandnoble.com, Amazon.com, and selected Missouri Barnes and Noble stores.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 6, 2008>
Stress is rampant in most of our lives today, and is a primary contributor to premature death.
Even when we make an effort to be healthier, we create more stress!
I experience health-related stress every time I try the latest count-every-calorie diet and go to bed with a growling stomach.We manage stress in individual and somewhat mystical ways.
Whether you cope with stress though exercise, aromatherapy, meditation, medication, therapy, or a combination, you use a method that blends with your personality.I've always believed in gut feelings, and my gut tells me that writing is the technique that works for me.
I will be the first to admit a bubble bath can brighten a bad day, but when I grapple with a dilemma, I need to write.
The key word is "need." It isn't that I want to write, or writing through the problem might help; writing is necessary.
Nothing else works as well as writing to relieve my stress, grief, disappointments, or the myriad of quandaries spawned by daily life.Through Jim's downward spiral into the land of dementia, I survived by writing.
From the first memory lapses through ten years of gradually losing my best friend and companion, I wrote.
Pen and paper, or my laptop, took the brunt of my anger, disappointment, and despair.
Had I unloaded all my problems onto other human being, I probably wouldn't have any friends or relatives without unlisted phone numbers.I wrote "Writing as Therapy: Rocks and Pebbles" for Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love.
One of the purposes of the book was to help others traveling the Alzheimer's journey.
I would have been remiss had I not shared the value of writing.Imagine my excitement to find research validates the therapeutic benefits of writing for both emotional well-being and physical problems.
It is easier for me to understand the emotional benefits of writing than to comprehend that participants of therapeutic writing experiments showed decreased blood pressure, less pain from arthritis, and better breathing in asthmatics.In this age of self-help, writing is an inexpensive way to use the benefit of self-reflection to increase our joy in living.
Researchers warn that writing is not a cure-all and may not work for everyone.
But if you are one who believes in gut feelings, you might want to give it a try.
Writing as therapy is not about being a "writer" or "published author;" it's about expressing your emotions through writing.My current book project, Writing as Therapy: Rocks and Pebbles, explores how writing memories, or even fiction, can be cathartic.
Writing allows me to reflect on life, examine my values, and validate my faith that my existence has meaning.
Writing is a stress-free health choice that allows me to feast on spiritual food.
No calorie counting required.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, June 29, 2008>
The submissions deadline for true slice-of-life stories for a book about early onset dementia has been extended to October 31, 2008.
Early onset Alzheimer's begins before age 65.
For complete guidelines and a sample story, please visit my website at www.lsfisher.com.Linda Fisher
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 28, 2008>
Jim always liked to talk to crows.
That's not really as strange as it seems since they talked back.
When he was a teenager, his aunt and uncle in Kansas City had a pet crow.
One day the crow got out of the house and Jim helped his uncle comb the neighborhood searching for Jim Crow.
A neighbor called and said a bird was on his roof yelling "Help me!
Help me!" Sure enough it was Jim Crow.On our many trips to Colorado, we camped at Moraine Park.
One day I was in the tent enjoying an afternoon nap until my solitude was disturbed by voices.
I thought it was children playing, but when I stepped outside the tent, Jim was sitting on a moraine talking to the crows.
They were having a lively conversation in high pitched crow talk.Last year, Ginger and I went to visit the spot where my sons scattered part of Jim's ashes, per his request.
Maybe, "request" is too mild a word.
He instructed me--showing me the exact spot.
As Ginger and I hiked to the quiet little meadow, a noisy crow followed us up the trail and perched in a tree nearby.In the early shade of evening we walked across the bridge to the parking lot.
"Did you notice the crow?" Ginger asked, pointing to the persistent bird."Yes, I thought it a little strange that he followed us to the meadow and back to the car." I unlocked the door and we climbed in my Oldsmobile Alero."Me too," she said."If Jim was here, he would talk to the crow." I rolled down the windows to let the heat escape the car."I think he is here," she said.
And we grinned at each other as she spoke aloud the very thought I had been thinking.The crow watched us as we drove away, calling loudly.
It sounded like he said, "Y'all come back." But I could have been mistaken because I never could understand crow talk the way Jim did.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, June 22, 2008>
What was I thinking to squeeze a week long conference into my busy schedule?
I spent Friday night and Saturday morning frantically packing for my journey.
With airlines so persnickety about the amount of luggage you can carry, more thought must go into the packing process.I chose my medium-sized suitcase because I didn't want to exceed the fifty pound weight limit.
I plopped it on my bathroom scales and it weighed in at 36 pounds.
The suitcase was so jammed that my purchases in Boston would have to be limited.
And darn the luck, our hotel was attached to a mall.
Thinking ahead, my co-worker, Brenda, opted for a large suitcase lightly packed.This was my first trip to Boston, a city of historical beauty, the freedom trail, brownstones, Fenway Park, and the World Champion Celtics.
It is a bonus to enter a city during a historic event.
I captured a picture, in my mind and on my cell phone, of the Celtics riding the Ducks in a green and white tickertape parade.
I was caught up in the excitement of the enthusiastic crowd.I might have known things were going way too smoothly.
We mailed two boxes of conference materials and checked out of the hotel.
Brenda hooked up her laptop to print out our boarding passes.
Our flight had been cancelled.
Now we would leave three hours later and arrive at Kansas City after 10:00 P.M.We rolled our luggage up to the ticket counter, and I heaved my bag onto the scales for weigh-in.
I breathed a sigh of relief when the red LCD stopped on 44 pounds.
Brenda wasn't so lucky.
Her bag was six pounds overweight.
"That will be $50." Brenda opened her suitcase, pulled out a large shopping bag and began cramming items into it.
The shopping bag saved her $50 when her lightened suitcase weighed in at 49 pounds.The lesson learned is that excess baggage comes at a cost.
The Alzheimer's journey requires us to share our load in order to complete the trip.
The weight we are willing to carry around on our shoulders is self-monitored, and the cost is not only more than $50; it is immeasurable.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 14, 2008>
I watch Father's Day ads on TV and think about how many years it has been since I've bought a gift.
My dad and father-in-law both died in 1990, so my husband became the recipient of Hallmark cards and aftershave.
Of course, during his nursing home years, I usually bought Jim NASCAR or Kansas City Chief tee-shirts for all special occasions.As the big day for dads nears, I began to think about what these three special dads have taught me.
My dad, Robert Capps, passed on his work ethic to all eight of us kids.
He taught us to give a full day's labor for a day's pay.
He encouraged us to stay in school and get an education so we could have a better, easier life than he and Mom.
My dad wasn't a religious man, but he taught us honesty, compassion, self respect, unselfishness, and ethical behavior.
He always wanted a better life for us kids.
He said, "It's as easy to love a rich man as a poor man." My two sisters and I never listened to that.
In the first place, we didn't know any rich men, and living in the Ozarks, we weren't in danger of ever meeting any.
Maybe that was his point.
He also wanted us to be independent.My father-in-law, William Howard "Bill" Fisher, taught me to laugh and find humor in unexpected places.
His personality was totally different from my dad.
Bill played music and his idea of a good time was to have a jam session with his family and friends.
Their extended family could usually be found in a campground alongside a creek with good fishing.
The Fishers traveled, moving from house to house, state to state.
Bill was sentimental and somewhat superstitious.
He saw life as mysterious and intriguing.
I once lost a contact lens, back in the days when they cost a lot of money.
Bill had a dream and knew exactly where to look for it the next morning.Jim inherited good qualities from both his parents.
He was happiest when he was driving down the road and taught me to love travel.
Jim was the most generous person I ever knew.
Jim would not only give someone the shirt off his back, he would give away his last $10 if someone else needed it.I came home one day to find Jim digging in his mom and dad's yard."What on earth are you doing?" I asked.He leaned against his shovel, wiped the sweat off his brow and said, "I'm going to build Mom and Dad a house.
That trailer is falling apart, and they can't live there anymore." Our mobile home was in better shape, and we had barely begun construction on our home.
We put our house on hold, and built a small, solid house for his parents.Most important, Jim taught me about true and enduring love.
Jim was generous with his love, and family always came first.
I knew that no matter what, he was always on my side.I have no father to buy presents for this Father's Day, but these three fathers left valuable gifts behind.
On Father's day, I will pause and cherish their legacies.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 7, 2008>
The Veterans Cemetery has a rule that during certain times of the year, live flowers in non-breakable vases are the only acceptable decorations.
The day before Memorial Day, I look over the fresh flowers at Wal-Mart.Sentimentality wins out and I purchase a half-dozen red roses to put in front of Jim's niche.
The roses may not be the most practical choice.
If the day is hot, they may wilt before the ceremony is finished.
But my heart is set on the red roses.
A single long-stemmed red rose was Jim's way of saying "I love you" on anniversaries, Valentine's Day, and for no reason at all.Do you think I could find a plastic vase in the entire Wal-Mart Supercenter?
I risk my groceries to stop at Big Lots, but they don't have any plastic vases either.
At home, I find a plastic jar that I decide I can use if my last ditch stop at the Higginsville Wal-Mart ends in failure.Once we pull off I-70 on the way to the cemetery, my sister-in-law, Ginger, and I storm into the store; two women on a mission.
First we look in the obvious places and find the normal grave arrangements along a wall.
Picnic supplies are jammed onto shelves nearby."How about these water bottles?" Ginger asked."They have possibilities," I said.The bottles are translucent red and blue, and don't have logos or ounce markers on them.
The price is good--two for $4.
They look much like vases, or at least will if we remove the lids.We put the bottles into the cart and head for the craft section where we select white wired ribbon and some decorative pebbles.
In the parking lot, we take scissors to the roses and put pebbles in the bottom of the blue bottle.
The arrangement seems a little top heavy so Ginger continues to stuff pebbles into the bottle on the ride to the cemetery.
By the time we put a ribbon on the improvised vase, we have a red, white, and blue floral arrangement.A light rain falls, and we think the ceremony may be cancelled.
The rain dwindles off, and the stars and stripes proudly line the white fence, and the service flags atop the columbarium whip in the gusty breeze.Of course, when I place Jim's roses in front of his niche, I notice about half the decorations are artificial arrangements or potted plants.
Jim's roses look nice and smell good and are worth the extra effort.
Ginger and I sit a stone bench for the ceremony, and watch the roses open up to embrace the day and proclaim that love is the one thing that doesn't die.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 31, 2008>
The Early Onset Book Project seeks submissions for a book devoted to young onset dementia.
Many books have been written about Alzheimer's, but Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love: Early Onset Dementia will provide a rare opportunity to demonstrate how the disease affects families from different points of view.
This book will bring to life the challenges of living with dementia and show the courage of persons with dementia and their families.Writers do not need to be professionals.
Stories written by the primary caregiver or the person with dementia are often the most compelling.
I will edit stories, if necessary, before submitting them to the judges who will select approximately thirty stories for the collection.The Early Onset Project is an exciting opportunity to educate our legislators that Alzheimer's is a neurological brain disease and not a normal part of aging.
The book will be formatted much like Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love: The 110,000 Missourians, with slice-of-life stories, pictures of the person with dementia (if submitted), and informational articles.
Missouri advocates distributed copies of Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love: The 110,000 Missourians with Alzheimer's to all Missouri legislators in Jefferson City and Washington, D.C.During our legislative visits at the Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum, Sarah Wilson of the Mid-Missouri Chapter compared Alzheimer's to another disease that affects so many people.
"When a family member has cancer, that person takes chemotherapy, and the rest of the family provides support for them.
With Alzheimer's, it's like the whole family is taking chemotherapy.
"Those of us who have lived with dementia understand that analogy.
When my husband developed dementia at age 49, advocacy and writing helped me cope.
He had aphasia and could not express his feelings, so I became his voice.Writing our experiences has a cathartic effect and helps promote spiritual healing.
Once we record the events and emotion, we realize we did our best and love makes us stronger than we ever thought we could be.
I have a presentation on this subject and will publish a book, Writing as Therapy: Rocks and Pebbles, in 2008 or 2009.Your personal stories give a voice to the 500,000 people with early onset dementia and their loved ones.
No one can tell your story but you.
Please share a slice-of-life moment with The Early Onset Project and let your voice be heard.For more information about submissions for the Early Onset Project, visit http://www.lsfisher.com/, or www.alz.org/mid-missouri/To download complete submissions guidelines: http://www.lsfisher.com/projectearly.htmlThe submissions deadline has been extended to October 31, 2008.
If you have any questions, please email me at earlyonset@hotmail.com.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 24, 2008>
While in Washington, DC, for the Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum, my grandson and I visited Arlington Cemetery in Virginia.
The only other time I was there was with Jim more than twenty years ago.
My recent visit brought back memories of the prior visit with my husband long before we knew anything about Alzheimer's.With more than 250,000 gravesites on 657 acres, Jim and I did what most reasonable people would do--took the bus tour so we wouldn't miss the highlights.
As it turned out, the highlight for Jim was Audie Murphy's grave.We were on the last bus tour of the day so we had to quickly visit each site and board the same bus.
The bus stopped for the changing of the guard at the Tomb of the Unknowns.
Everyone hustled past the Memorial Amphitheatre, except Jim.
I hung back to see where he was headed."We're going to miss the changing of the guard," I said.Jim stood in front of Audie Murphy's plain grave marker videotaping.
"This is what I wanted to see more than anything," he said.After several minutes, we walked toward the crowd and saw part of the ceremony.
This incident stands out in my memory as an example of Jim's unique view of life.
He was a person more intrigued by a simple grave marker than by a ceremony.
He appreciated the grace and beauty of endless rows of marble stones"I would like to be buried here," he said."That's not a good idea," I argued, "because I wouldn't be able to visit your grave."He smiled and put his arm around me.
It was just a passing thought and not something he dwelled on.On Memorial Day, I will travel to the Missouri Veterans Cemetery which has the grace and beauty of Arlington on a much smaller scale.
At 1:00 p.m., they will have a ceremony to honor our heroes buried there.I knew Jim well enough to know that had he seen the Missouri Veterans Cemetery, he would have preferred it to Arlington.
Jim's ashes are in a niche in a columbarium which overlooks a small lake.
While the ceremony goes on, I imagine that, in spirit, Jim will be fishing in the lake and pretty much ignoring the crowd, being his own person, doing his own thing.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 18, 2008>
This was my eighth trip to Washington, DC, to ask for increased research funds for Alzheimer's.
It becomes frustrating when nothing seems to happen.
NIH funding for Alzheimer's research has remained flat for the past five years, and Maureen Reagan's $1 billion goal appears to be unattainable.It is our job as advocates to educate our legislators and remain visible.
We wore our purple "beauty queen" banners which made us hard to forget.
Sandra Day O'Connor and Newt Gingrich both testified at the Congressional Hearing on Alzheimer's.
One of the senators said, "This is the biggest group I have ever seen at a hearing." The room was crowded and people stood along both walls and in the back.
Mrs. O'Connor said, "This is a problem that cries out for help." She said research was closer than ever to finding a way to dissolve the plaques which are the hallmark of Alzheimer's.My grandson, Colby, traveled to Washington, DC, with me for his second Public Policy Forum.
The Alzheimer's Association asked us to focus on two main issues this year.
We asked for $125 million increase to the $644 million spent on Alzheimer's research, and to phase out the Social Security disability two-year wait for Medicare benefits.
The two-year wait places a hardship on people with early onset dementia during the time when medical treatment is most helpful.It is more urgent than ever to find a cure for Alzheimer's as the baby boomers age.
"A cure can save Medicare and Medicaid $60 billion a year," Colby told his parents on the ride home from the airport.
"I learned a lot," he said.
And he did.
He learned that 500,000 Americans have developed Alzheimer's before age 65 and more than 5 million people in the United States have Alzheimer's."Why do you stay involved?" is a question I hear frequently.
Alicia, who has early onset Alzheimer's told our representative's legislative aide, "Linda doesn't have to do what she does since her husband passed away."I don't have any choice but to remain involved.
Advocacy didn't end when Jim died!
Through my involvement with advocacy, I've become friends with many people who have early onset dementia, and I care about them and their health.
I worry about what the future holds for Alicia, Charley, Tracy, Karen, Bill, David, Lynne and many others.
I ache for the caregivers because I know how emotionally and physically challenging their journey will be.
I grieve for the man whose wife held his hand and led him from session to session at the Public Policy Forum; the lost look in his eyes haunts me and revives memories of Jim.Alzheimer's is a disease, not a normal part of aging.
We need to advocate for a cure and for programs to help those living with dementia.
It is time we have Alzheimer's survivors to honor at our Memory Walks!
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 15, 2008>
This is a link for an article in The Sedalia Democrat about the Alzheimer's Association Missouri Coalition first annual Advocate of the Year Award:http://www.sedaliademocrat.com/news/advocate_7818___article.html/forum_walk.htmlThank you for this honor!
Linda Fisher
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 3, 2008>
Those of us living in the Show Me state tend to get excited about tangible things, which most definitely include morel mushrooms.
Due to the heavy rain this year, morels are being found in record numbers.
My sister-in-law has been combing the woods and shared her abundant supply with me.I grew up in the heart of the Ozarks where mushroom hunting should qualify as a sport.
During my years of hunting, I've been chased by bulls, came within a hairs' breath of stepping on a copperhead, came eyeball-to-eyeball with a snake hanging out of a tree, jumped creeks, balanced on a log to cross a ravine, slid down embankments--just to mention a smattering of the dangers involved.
Rather than suffering from post traumatic stress disorder because of my innumerable misadventures, I think of mushroom hunting with fondness.At mushroom time, the woods come alive.
Dogwood, redbud, and wildflowers burst into bloom.
Mayflowers open their umbrellas, birds chirp, twitter, whistle and squawk, squirrels chatter and dance precariously on limbs, the scent of wild onions and garlic fill the air.
There's something refreshing about carrying a walking stick and pushing aside nature's ground cover to find a perfect morel poking up through the leaves.It is best to hunt with a partner so that when you wander into dangerous situations, someone has your back.
I was always confident hunting with Jim and knew he would see that nothing would harm me.
I remember one year Jim found a patch of mushrooms and didn't pick any of them.
He led me to them and let me "find" them.
If you aren't a mushroom hunter, you don't realize how symbolic that is of true love.You notice I didn't say anything about hunting mushrooms this year.
For all my fond memories, I haven't braved the snakes and ticks to find those little darlings.
It's something I long to do, but haven't been motivated to do.
In life, we constantly balance memories against reality.
The sun is shining today, and we had more rain yesterday.
Wait--is that the siren song of a great spring mushroom hunting day I hear outside my patio doors?
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 27, 2008>
The whistle makes a soothing mournful sound in the coach section of Amtrak.
The rain snakes across the windows blurring the trees with their tease of green.
Water pools in every dip of land from the April rain that has been falling for the past two days.
Miniature lakes are surrounded by grassy meadows.
The Missouri River is grey and turbulent from the flooding streams.
A barge pushes a load beneath the grey metal structure of a bridge.The leisurely train ride affords a chance for people, like me, who take advantage of every quiet moment, to write.
My laptop fits nicely on the tray and an electrical outlet lets me work long after a battery would shut down.
I spend most of the twelve hour ride from Sedalia to Chicago working on a new book, Writing as Therapy: Rocks and Pebbles.As the train passes through small towns and past St. Louis, I think about how this leisurely mode of travel would have suited Jim.
He inherited wanderlust from his parents' vagabond lifestyle and was happiest on the road.
Jim always said the best part of any journey was traveling down the highway.
He was just as happy throwing a sleeping bag on the ground as he was staying in a motel.
Jim preferred travel by car much more than flying, and I know he would have enjoyed the train ride.Although the train outpaces the trucks on the interstate, train travel is not for those a tight deadline or people with no patience.
Sometimes the train pulls to a side track and waits for a freight train to pass.
Or, may even back up and hook onto a train having engine trouble and pull them along to their next stop.
Sometimes cranky children cry or someone shouts into his cell phone and disturbs the quiet.
Most of the time, it is peaceful and the seats are comfortable.Something about the train makes me long for the days when Jim taught me to think about the journey and not just the destination.
When the whistle blows, the sound makes me lonesome for those youthful days.
The rain weeps, but I smile in remembrance of our journeys.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 9, 2008>
Linda Fisher, AuthorAlzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional LoveInvites YOU to a Book SigningBarnes and NobleColumbia, MOSunday, April 131:30 - 3:30 PMA Voice for Missourians with Alzheimer'sIn Missouri, an estimated 110,000 people have Alzheimer's or a related disorder.
Caregivers, family, and friends bring the number of Missourians directly impacted by the disease to more than a half-million.Alzheimer's had never affected anyone close to me until my husband Jim began his downward spiral into the abyss of dementia.
A diagnosis of Alzheimer's is frightening and the prognosis is devastating.
Alzheimer's has remained a mystery, the cure illusive.How could Jim have dementia when he was only 49 years old?
The concept was unfathomable that small mental glitches could escalate into massive cell death that would erase my husband's memory and skills.
Jim once repaired our van with a piece of baling wire, but two years into the disease he could not focus enough to screw in a light bulb, twisting it first one way and then another.Jim was a talented singer and musician who could play a multitude of stringed instruments.
Eventually he could not play his guitar, and his voice was stilled by aphasia.
Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love is a collection of stories that give a voice to Missourians who have experienced this life altering disease.
When our loved one has dementia, we embark upon an unwilling journey into an uncharted world.
It is the death of our dreams, our plans, and the birth of unconditional love.
Alzheimer's brings about role reversals as we struggle to provide care for people who once took care of us.The stories in the collection capture the effect Alzheimer's has on caregivers, sons, daughters, in-laws, children, grandchildren, and healthcare workers.
The writers range from a Pulitzer Prize nominee to unpublished authors.Tracy Mobley, diagnosed at 38, wrote a story filled with humor and laced with the tragedy Alzheimer's has brought to her family.
Charles Schneider describes the shock of being diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer's.For those beginning the journey, these true slice-of-life stories will help them realize they are not alone.
We all walk together, holding hands, giving each other hugs and encouragement.I look forward to seeing you April 13 at the Columbia Barnes and Noble Bookstore.Linda Fisher 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 5, 2008>
I visited my sister-in-law in the hospital yesterday.
I left her room and outside the door a lady sat on a bench, cell phone to her ear carrying on a lively conversation.
Around the corner through a patient's open door, I saw an elderly woman's visitor talking into her cell phone.
About half the people you see in Wal-Mart are talking on cell phones.
With more than 219 million active cell phones in the United States, that's a lot of conversation.Cell phones are everywhere.
Ringtones interrupt sermons, speeches, training, work, corporate board meetings, live theatre, movies, and funerals as people forget to turn off their electronic devices.
I was at a conference one time where the announcement was made, "If your cell phone rings, you pay $5." The speaker was the first person to pay.Cell phone plans provide an economical way to stay in touch with family and friends.
With free nights and weekends it is easier to communicate with everyone you love.When you talk to someone with Alzheimer's, phone conversations can be deceptive.
Often people with dementia continue to carry on polite conversation and give yes and no answers.
It is frustrating for caregivers and family who live close by when the long distance relatives say, "Dad sounds fine to me.
I think you are overreacting."Early in Jim's disease, he always forgot to relay phone messages, so we installed caller ID.
When he talked on the phone, he could make polite conversation.
Even people who knew him well might not notice anything strange about his conversation.
He interjected "I'm just fine," "You don't say?" and other polite phrases at appropriate intervals.
After he hung up the phone, I would ask who he had been talking to, and his response was usually, "I have no idea" or "You know them."Our satellite TV account was in Jim's name, and they called constantly with offers to upgrade our package.
Jim always said yes, and when I called to cancel the expensive channels, they didn't want to talk to me.
Jim died three years ago, and I still can't get his name off the account but they finally added mine.I frequently receive phone calls offering me truck driving jobs.
Just a few days ago an upbeat male voice said, "We just reviewed your resume and have an excellent truck driving job for you." I did not submit a resume, but I am listed in the city directory with an occupation of driver.
I'm pretty sure that information came from Jim, because after he could no longer drive, he referred to me as his "driver."While I worked on my blog post today, I received a phone call from Karen Waterhouse who plans to submit a story for the Early Onset Project.
Karen has benefited from a combination of traditional medical treatment and a combination of herbs.
She told me about the 22nd Annual Alzheimer's and Related Dementia Wisconsin State Conference she will be attending in May.Karen called because she could not find my email address.
Just as we ended our conversation, she said, "I have a plan on my cell phone so it doesn't cost me to call on weekends."To hear Karen's voice, feel her energy and optimism, made my day.
I'm so thankful that I have gotten to know so many people with early onset dementia.
These personal friends keep me motivated to continue advocating for a cure for Alzheimer's in a way that statistics never could.The ability to communicate with family and friends needs to be weighed against the cacophony of disruptive ringing cell phones.
So, if I walk past you in Wal-Mart with my cell phone to my ear, I just might be involved in an important conversation.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 30, 2008>
I usually don't look at the J C Penney One Day Only sales because I can almost always find a "must have" item, usually shoes.
I am especially susceptible to buy-one-and-get-one-half-price shoe sales.
Can you believe one of those sales was going on today?
Wouldn't you know they had a picture of a pair of white Skechers similar to the two black pair and burgundy ones I own and love?So, like a true shoeaholic, I entered Penney's holding my four-year-old granddaughter's hand.
After a cursory look at clothing, we meandered to the shoe department.
On prominent display was not just ONE pair of Sketchers different from the ones I had, but FOUR."I would like to try these, these, these, and these," I told the sales clerk.While the clerk searched the storeroom for the shoes in my size, my granddaughter selected a pair of pink house slippers with a fluff of fur and Disney princesses on the toes.We found a bench to try on our shoes.
I slipped off the burgundy Skechers I was wearing to try on the natural colored pair with a lacy pattern.
"The mirror is over there," the sales clerk said."Those look cool with your black socks, Grandma Linda!" My granddaughter said with the enthusiasm of the very young.
She pronounced the white pair with mesh ventilation and the black lacy pair as "Cool!"I tried on a shiny brocade shoe with a water lily design, and my granddaughter said, "Those are precious, Grandma Linda!" She smiled at me, her face lit with joy, a beautiful child in a pink glitzy shirt, with silky blonde hair held back in with a poofy pink bow.
I felt a pang that because of Jim's dementia, he never had the opportunity to share these happy moments with his grandchildren.Sometimes when I was immersed in the daily responsibilities of caregiving, I felt my joy had been stolen.
When someone who had never taken care of a person with dementia offered simplistic views or started a sentence with "If I were you," I knew that even if they walked a mile in my shoes, they could not begin to grasp the heartbreak of being a caregiver.Yet, love for my family made me realize that life goes on, and many, many happy moments are yet to come.
The sales clerk and I smiled at the Skechers being described as "precious.""OK, precious or cool?
I'm only buying two pair.
You are my fashion consultant, and I want to know which two pair to buy."Without the slightest hesitation, she pointed to the white mesh pair, "Those, and," pointing to the natural pair, "those.""Not the precious ones?" I asked, running my fingers along the silky finish of the shoes."No.
The cool ones." Well grandmas want to be cool.I left the store with a bulging bag of shoes and could easily walk a mile in my cool pair of Skechers along a path where moments of joy pop up like wildflowers to remind me how precious life is.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 22, 2008>
Not a day has gone by that I haven't thought of Jim since I met him in 1968.
He died almost three years ago and remains with me through memories of the life we shared.
Sometimes the little things, or pebbles, become lost in the big rocks, or major events.
When something triggers our thoughts, we discover a pebble hidden by the shadows.As I exited church last Sunday, I caught the scent of green apple gum.
I smiled, and I assume that everyone just thought I was happy, or being friendly.
In that moment, I could feel Jim's presence beside me, and he definitely was not happy.When our kids were small, they thought green apple gum was the best tasting gum available.
Jim would not tolerate the gum in the house, or even worse, the car."Who's chewing that stinky gum!" he would shout, as he glared into the rearview mirror at the kids.
The offending child would roll his window down and spit the gum out.
It became a joke in the family that Jim could not tolerate the smell of green apple gum.
This is a man who liked limburger cheese, which in my opinion, smells like road kill.
A small piece of green apple gum made his stomach roll, and he would retch if exposed to the smell very long.One time we drove to Kansas with our friends, Rick and Sandy.
We stopped at a rest area to get gas, and Sandy who had heard of Jim's legendary aversion to green apple gum, bought some.
"This will be so funny!" she said as she paid the clerk."Sandy, he won't see the humor in it," I warned her.As soon as Rick pulled his van out of the parking lot and headed down I-70, Sandy started shoving green apple gum into her mouth until she had such a wad of it she could hardly chew it.
As soon as the smell released, Jim whipped his head around and shouted, "Who's chewing green apple gum!""I am," Sandy said meekly, aware now that it really set him off.
Without being told, she opened a window and threw the gum out.That was the last time I smelled green apple gum until Sunday at church.
I shook hands with the pastor and left the building.
Jim would have hunted down the person with the green apple gum and informed them they were polluting his air space.
That was the Jim I knew and loved, and the one that sometimes exasperated me.I have never chewed green apple gum, and never will.
I don't have the low tolerance for it that Jim had, but a whiff of green apple gum pelts my senses with a pebble of memory.
Green apple gum triggers a random remembrance of the complex and very human man who shared my life for 37 years and still lives in my heart.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 16, 2008>
He pushed the speed dial on his cell phone to call his stock broker and said, "Check and see if my stock sold today." He rattled off his account number and the stock symbol.
"What do you mean, you don't know?
Just look it up on your computer.""You need to talk to my manager, and he is on the phone.""How long will he be on the phone?" he asked, irritated that he didn't get the information he wanted.
"OK, I'll call back later." As he touched the disconnect button, the display showed he had been talking to Days Inn.With today's technology, we have information at our fingertips that once took hours of intense research.
The problem is that sometimes the information is incorrect or incomplete.Enter "Alzheimer's" into Google, you get 14 million hits.
How do you determine which websites contain accurate and truthful information?
Sometimes websites look official, but they aren't.
Domain names are distributed on a first come, first serve basis and the names are sometimes intentionally deceptive.The Alzheimer's Association is the largest private nonprofit funding resource for Alzheimer research.
With 300 points of service in the U.S., you can contact your local chapter for support.
To find the closest chapter and trusted information on Alzheimer's, visit the Alzheimer's Association's website at http://www.alz.org/.If you are traveling and need a room reservation, call Days Inn.
But if you need care consultation or immediate information about Alzheimer's, call their 24/7 Helpline at 1-800-272-3900.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 9, 2008>
Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love is a collection of thirty-seven true stories about Missourians who have embarked upon an unwilling journey into an uncharted world toward a future different than the one envisioned.
It is the death of dreams, plans, and the birth of unconditional love.
The stories capture the effect Alzheimer's has on caregivers, sons, daughters, in-laws, friends, children, grandchildren, and healthcare workers.
The collection includes two stories from persons diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer's.
The writers range from a Pulitzer Prize nominee to unpublished authors.
For those beginning the journey, these true storieswill help them realize they are not alone.Available at amazon.com, BarnesandNoble.com, and at Missouri Barnes and Noble stores.
Signed copies available at www.lsfisher.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 8, 2008>
I saw a demonstration of how much our words and thoughts affect others.
The speaker, Travis Mathes, asked for a volunteer, and a self-confident business man, Daryl, came forward.
Travis asked Daryl to hold his arms outstretched to his sides and resist his attempts to force his arms down.
Then he asked Daryl to lower his arms, looked him in the eye, and said, "You are ugly, you are stupid, you are worthless..."After about eight derogatory statements, Travis asked Daryl to hold his arms out and without using any more force than the first time, easily pushed Daryl's arms down.
Daryl's take on it, "Wow, that was weird!"This demonstration shows how our words can demoralize another person into a position of weakness.
Travis immediately said eight positive things, and Daryl had the strength to resist the pressure on his arms.After Daryl sat down, Travis asked a woman to come forward.
Instead of saying anything to her, he simply asked her to look into his eyes for about a minute.
He easily pushed her arms down.
They made eye contact again, and this time his attempt failed.
The difference?
The first time, he thought the same things he said to Daryl.
The second time, he thought positive, flattering thoughts.We have often heard how our tone of voice and body language can affect people with Alzheimer's.
Even if their communication skills have degraded, our tone of voice conveys whether we are complimenting them or degrading them.
If we speak to our loved ones with dementia in a positive tone with words that make them feel good about themselves, they will be stronger emotionally and physically.
If we scold them or disparage their value as a human being, they become weaker and downtrodden.Medical science cannot develop medicine as powerful as our words, attitude, and body language when it comes to preserving quality of life for ourselves and our loved ones with Alzheimer's.
The power is within each of us to encourage and positively influence our loved ones.
It can be something as simple as saying, "You smell great today.
You have a beautiful smile.
I love you."Don't get me wrong.
I understand being a caregiver is challenging, and at certain times you may find yourself incapable of positive thoughts or words.
At those times, find a mirror, look into your own eyes, and say, "I'm doing my best.
I am a good caregiver." Your words will make you strong.Thank you, Travis, for the eye-opening demonstration.To contact Travis Mathes for a speaking engagement, email mathest@marktwain.net
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 1, 2008>
My head is still spinning from my conversation last Friday with Connie Wasserman, Program Director of Senior Services, Sid Jacobson Jewish Community Center, East Hills, NY.
Connie is a dynamic lady dedicated to improving quality of life for young onset individuals.
Yes, she refers to those with dementia that began before age 65 as young onset.Connie told me that the first time she attended a roundtable discussion about early onset dementia, half of the people attending mistakenly thought "early onset" was synonymous with "early stage." The terms are confusing!Early stage has nothing to do with age; it refers to the stage of the disease.
In the early stages of Alzheimer's, a person may exhibit personality changes or memory loss that affects job performance, show lapses in judgment, demonstrate difficulty remembering words or names, and could have problems handling money or paying bills.Early onset means the disease has been recognized in a person who is younger than 65 years old.
The Alzheimer's Association estimates that 500,000 people in the United States have early onset dementia.People with young onset dementia require stimulation to improve the quality of their lives.
Connie described Sid Jacobson's "Let's Do Lunch" program.
In addition to lunch, participants enjoy music therapy, step aerobics, art therapy, and a creative writing program.
This adult day program for young people in the moderate stage of a neurodegenerative disease is innovative and carefully developed.Connie and I share a mission to advocate for better lives for those with dementia.
I have begun to collect stories for the Early Onset Project, which will provide an opportunity for those with early, or young, onset to share their stories.
In addition to compelling slice-of-life stories, the book will contain informational articles.
Connie plans to write an article for the Early Onset Project about their programs for young onset individuals.If you or someone you love has early onset dementia, you will agree with Connie Wasserman that "this population is more than underserved--it is non-served." Let's hope the ripple in New York turns into a tidal wave of recognition and ACTION toward improving quality of life for those with early onset dementia.To watch a video and for information about the young onset programs visit http://www.sjcc.org/For complete submissions guidelines for the Early Onset Book Project visit my website at http://www.lsfisher.com/ and click on the Early Onset Project link.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 23, 2008>
Joel Osteen ministries unleashed hope and inspiration in Kansas City last night.
Joel has the God-given talent to make millions believe in the premise of his books, "Live Your Best Life Now" and "Become a Better You."At Kansas City's Night of Hope, a packed Kemper Arena learned the limited scope of Joel Osteen's half-hour TV broadcast.
During a longer worship service, the music is lively, uplifting, and the singers actually jump up and down while they sing.
They must be young, or they would surely be out of breath.Joel's wife, Victoria, shares a message that is relevant for anyone dealing with Alzheimer's.
She speaks of unconditional love and how inner happiness begins with loving your own family.
She says that to demonstrate your love for your family, celebrate daily moments instead of waiting for major events.
Victoria drinks one cup of coffee in the morning and although he doesn't drink coffee, Joel fixes coffee for her and sometimes brings it to her in bed.
This small act of kindness shows his love for her.I personally identify with Victoria's coffee story.
Always the early riser, Jim required a cup of coffee and no obstacle ever interfered with his morning ritual.
Once he brewed a pot on our camp stove in a hospital parking lot, and another time, hiked across a busy St. Louis interstate to McDonald's because the hotel coffee shop did not open until the ridiculously late hour of 6:00 a.m. All I had to do was snuggle beneath warm covers and he would bring me my first cup of coffee in bed, complete with creamer, just the way I liked it.
It was just one of the ways Jim showed he loved me.As dementia clouded Jim's abilities, he became more dependent on me, and I was blessed to return some of the consideration and care he had always shown me.
One time I went to the Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum and was dismayed when I returned to find no one had shaved Jim during my absence.
His mother told me Jim pushed away the nurses' aide who tried to shave him and struggled through his voice-stealing aphasia to say, "No!
Linda." Shaving him was a small daily celebration of our love, and no nurses' aide would pat Old Spice onto his smooth cheeks the same way I did.When someone you love has Alzheimer's you have daily opportunities to celebrate your unconditional love.
If you face each breaking dawn with inner hope and a conviction that each day is too precious to waste, you will find a Joel Osteen type of inspiration to "Live Your Best Life Now."
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 16, 2008>
On Memory Day, hundreds of Missouri advocates will converge on our state capitol to urge our senators and representatives to support legislation to help our fellow Missourians with Alzheimer's and their families.
On March 12, Missouri advocates will distribute copies of Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love: The 110,000 Missourians with Alzheimer's to our state legislators.As a long-time advocate, I know personal stories make a greater impact on legislators than statistics.
The book contains 37 true stories, but even if legislators read only the title, they will realize that 110,000 Missourians are living with dementia.Many books have been written about Alzheimer's, but this type of anthology gives a rare opportunity to show how the disease affects families from different points of view.
This book brings to life the challenges of living with dementia and shows the courage of persons with dementia and their families as they adjust their lives to accommodate dementia.Now, the Early Onset Book Project seeks submissions for a book devoted to young onset dementia.
This is an exciting opportunity to educate our legislators that Alzheimer's is a neurological brain disease and not a normal part of aging.
This book will be formatted much like the Missouri book with slice-of-life stories, pictures of the person with dementia (if submitted), and informational articles.Writers do not need to be professionals!
In fact, stories written by the primary caregiver or the person with dementia are the most compelling.
I will edit stories, if necessary, before submitting them to the judges.
The deadline is June 30, but I certainly hope most stories are submitted well in advance of the deadline so proper editing will give them the best chance of being selected for the book.The Alzheimer's Association estimates that approximately 500,000 Americans have dementia that began before age 65.
My vision is that the Early Onset Dementia book will make a huge impact on legislators at every state level and in Washington, DC.One definition of advocate is, "A person who pleads on behalf of another." Your compelling slice-of-life stories help convince legislators of the need for increased National Institute of Health research funds to find a cure for Alzheimer's.Are you an Alzheimer's advocate?
If you aren't, you should consider becoming one by sharing your story with this project.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 10, 2008>
Do you have happy memories of puppy love?
Do you remember your classmates stuffing valentines into a decorated box placed on the corner of your desk in elementary school?I remember a valentine from the second grade that said, "Let me be your prince and guard your castle." It came from the cutest boy in my class.
It was the prize valentine out of box of 32--the one with the most sparkle.
Time stood still as I waited, heart pounding, for him to open the valentine I had given him.
Just like in a TV Hallmark moment, he caught my eye across the classroom and smiled at me.
Life was good, my feelings were returned.When I was seven years old, I planned to marry my classmate when I grew up and live happily ever after.
My plans changed, and I did not marry the dark-haired boy with the killer smile.
It was just a case of puppy love.After we grow up, puppy love seems, well, so puppyish.
Somewhere along the way, we realize that love is much more than holding hands and valentines.
The reason we love someone has more to do with character and personality and a lot less with how they look.
We become less selfish and more giving.When someone we love has dementia, we learn a new level of love that we may have not previously known.
We begin to love unconditionally without expectations of reciprocation.Alzheimer's often brings about role reversals as we struggle to provide care for loved ones who once took care of us.
Love will make a caregiver stronger than he ever thought he could be.
The Bible teaches that love always protects, always trusts, always hopes, and always perseveres.
That sounds like a perfect definition of a caregiver with a heart full of unconditional love.
Be sure to give your loved one the biggest glitziest valentine you can find, and wait breathlessly for that big smile.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 2, 2008>
We each grieve in our own way.
When a loved one has dementia, we often find ourselves grieving over a long period of time.
We grieve as we lose our private jokes one day, and then, six months later we grieve again when we lose our quiet moments of conversation over morning coffee.I think we grieve so much that we no longer fear the separation of death.
We may mistakenly think our grieving is done, and when our loved one dies, the feeling of loss can take us by surprise.
My husband died in April 2005, after ten years with dementia.
Even after all this time a song, picture, dream, or fleeting thought can remind me of him and I find myself missing him and grieving his loss.I keep busy and am involved with the Alzheimer's Association.
I don't spend my time depressed or lonely, but I think it is entirely my prerogative to feel sad or cry when feelings overwhelm me.
I wrote a story called "The Aftermath" for the book I compiled and edited, Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love.
I almost left the story out because I thought it might be too sad, but I've received more comments on that story than any other in the book.Grief is natural and has no timetable.
Still, the greatest tribute we can pay to our loved ones is to move forward and honor their memory by living a full and happy life.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 26, 2008>
From the time I was a teenager, I dreamed of writing a book.
For many years, my writing consisted of journaling, and I never seemed to find the time to actually write the great American novel.
Then, I had a dream to compile a book of slice-of-life stories about Alzheimer's.
My blueprint was drawn from images in my mind.
I visualized the completed book: circular pictures of the people featured in the stories, divided into the stages of the disease, and articles to help people find resources.
I dreamed the book could influence legislators to increase research dollars when they read these personal stories, saw the faces of dementia, or learned from the title of the book that 110,000 people in Missouri have Alzheimer's.
Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love was printed in September 2007 and will be distributed to legislators on Memory Day, March 12, 2008.
Sure, it took a lot of work and perseverance, but no one said turning dreams into reality was easy.Now my dream is to write a book devoted to early onset dementia.
My dream is that this book will be better than the first one, and send a new message: Alzheimer's is a brain disease, not a normal part of aging.Alzheimer's is a dream shattering disease, and throughout Jim's illness, I rebuilt my dreams many times.
The disease made me feel powerless, and to regain control of my world, I directed my efforts into volunteering.
A new network of friends and a focus on the big picture became the basis of new dreams.Dreams don't come true by merely wishing.
They come true through work, faith, and giving.
As we give of ourselves, we receive blessings.
If we have faith that our dreams can become reality, we work toward our goals which align us with our dreams.
And we must always keep the faith, for without it, we cannot dream.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 19, 2008>
When I sleep, my thoughts open up to new possibilities, and inspiration can lead me in a different direction.
Last night, my vision was an indelible marker and its similarity to dementia.What does an indelible marker have to do with dementia?
When someone we love has Alzheimer's or a related dementia, we often think they are fading away as their memories and skills are erased.
We grieve for the past and dread the future.
Yet, we are blessed with living in the present and find moments of joy radiating in the midst of an ordinary day.When Jim developed dementia at forty-nine, we knew life would never be the same.
Our memories eventually became my memories.
The disease stole Jim from me, but it could not steal the indelible mark he left behind.In the end, instead of erasing Jim, dementia ensured he would never be forgotten.
His two pictures on the cover of Alzheimer's Anthology of Unconditional Love are indelible images of Jim.
In one picture, he smiles from beneath his favorite Stetson.
In the other, he walks away from the camera on a beach in Oregon.
I can't imagine his indelible memory living in a happier place.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 25, 2016>
    At a joyous time for so many who are young(er) and an emotional time for so many who are old(er) and have suffered loss, one wonders whether having the first day of Chanukah begin on the exact same day as Christmas compounds the number of lonely, sad, depressed people in the world.
Countless articles and studies about holidays bringing on depression are available.
Advice for sufferers and information about available support exist in abundance.
Googling "holiday depression" produces 1,220,000 results.
Even here, on this blog since its inception, holiday ideas for helping elders feel supported, cared about and loved exist.
What do we know and what can we do to reduce holiday loneliness in those we care about?
Speaking personally--which I try to avoid--is my onIy option.
I know from my counseling training that I can't be objective when my husband died just over 6 months ago.
That's the reason for the larger gap of time between my last post and this.
I simply couldn't figure out how to write on the subject again.
With a different perspective I've reread my prior posts and can comment.
(Click links below and check out ideas.)
To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 21, 2016>
                     Traditions and Transitions Impact Aging Parents                                   and the Elders We Care About   Last year my annual Thanksgiving post focused on turning over a tradition, hosting Thanksgiving dinner, to the next generation.
For me it signaled a major transition.
We had hosted Thanksgiving dinner for family and friends since the first year of our marriage--whether we were in the East, West, or Southwest.
Little did I know that now, a year later, my husband wouldn't be alive.
But since I'd relinquished the Thanksgiving tradition last year, being a guest for Thanksgiving this year was easy and welcomed at a time of many transitions that aren't always easy....or welcomed.
Please visit my other site to view entire post. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 30, 2016>
Taking aging parents and elders we care about  to see the Halloween displays Who doesn't enjoy Halloween decorations!
They're becoming increasingly widespread.
Indoors and out-of-doors these decorations are so much more elaborate than the orange, carved, candle-lit pumpkins--and perhaps a black cat or witch-- sitting on the front porches of our childhood homes.
However.....aging parents and older people we care about may not have the pleasure of seeing them.
Here's how to remedy this-- Whether in the country or the city, various-shaped, and even white-creamy-colored-pumpkins, along with Halloween themed inflatables--plus ghosts skeletons, and witches--are common sights.
To view entire post please visit my other site        
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 21, 2016>
Is it Better to do Nothing or--at least--Less?
and A Woman Rejects Mammograms at a Certain Age A friend just drove to upstate New York to be with her 70-some-year-old mother who was having a lumpectomy.
While her mother didn't want her to make the trip, she was glad to do it so she could help out a bit.
That's what daughters do, right?
I thought about Sr. Advisor, R, who in her early 90's, decided against any more mammograms--period.
Her rationale: if they found something suspicious she wasn't going to do anything about it anyway, so why impact her life with knowledge that would only cause stress and concern--for herself and for those around her.
When R died in her sleep at 101, it was assumed old age was the reason.
To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 25, 2016>
Fall foliage and Walkers in Central Park 2015 Do we notice mood changes in elders when less daylight makes days feel shorter?
September 22nd.
The beginning of Fall-- the Fall Equinox.
Hours of daylight lessen.
Days feel shorter.
Darker days darken some people's mood.
Clearly the elderly aren't immune and may be even more at risk if they live alone or are inclined to "see the glass half empty."
The idea of cozy, apple cider, pumpkin pie and beautiful fall foliage may be off their radar--replaced by gloom, doom, and loneliness as they contemplate--literally--darker days ahead Adding some spirit-lifting ideas for this group has become tradition for Help!
Aging  Parents.
But we're a bit earlier this year and why is that?
Visit my other site to view entire post
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 18, 2016>
Caregiving.
Caregiver support.
One size never fits all.
We have our own ways of approaching and handling things.That said, a reference to this Kiplinger's magazine article, Pitching In When Caregivers Need Help, was glaring at me as I began moving older Newsworthy articles from the column at right, to "Newsworthy Archives" (above).
Having just gone through months of what qualifies as "caregiving," I'm thinking the idea for finding additional help as offered by Kiplinger's  three listed sites below may appeal to many.
www.lotsahelpinghands.com www.careflash.com https://www.caringbridge.org/  To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 10, 2016>
Picture this: Our with-it aging father banks online and has a smart phone.
But we don't know his PINS (personal identification numbers), passwords or where-or even if-there's a list of them somewhere.
This didn't trouble us when we bragged about his ability to use new technology, but it becomes a gigantic problem when a health event that affects his memory occurs-namely: he can't remember his PINS or passwords.
To view entire post, please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 29, 2016>
 Importance of Hugs and "Love You's" for Older, Hospitalized Adults                                    (Seems obvious, doesn't it)"Hugs" and "Love You"--two expressions generously shared these days.They make us feel valued, nurture our souls, support emotional and physical well being.
They're exchanged countless times by friends and family in our younger years, lessening in old age, and problematical for hospitalized elders and those who love them, especially at life's end.
Hospitalization makes hugs and personal sharing tricky.
Aides come in to draw a drop of blood and take temperatures numerous times daily.
Physical barriers exist between us and the person in bed.
IV poles, monitors, drips, lines, tray tables, night stands--and those bed rails--defy making easy physical contact....unless one has super-long arms or is a contortionist.
Hospital regulations, loss of privacy and constant interruptions interfere with that special, loving connection we ideally want with our love ones.
And touching is a powerful part.
The Question: How do we convey our love and caring to one restricted to a hospital bed?
I'd forgotten how hard it was to give my mother a hug when her small body lay in that wide bed with bed rails up to keep her safe.
I forgot how ludicrous I thought it was when elderly people are so weak they need help to turn over, yet have bed's rails blocking  access.
Here's the recipe to combat that isolation and bring some normalcy and love into the equation:  To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 22, 2016>
When we work hard at something, expend great effort--perhaps even go beyond what we thought were our limits--we've invested ourselves.
Indeed, when we've put a lot of ourselves into something it permeates us.
Be it caregiving or whatever, it becomes a significant part of life; the major part of life; and for some individuals--their life.
Over time it's easy to lose perspective and upset the needed balance to be emotionally and physically healthy.
"You've got to take care of yourself.
"How many times do caregivers hear that?
We needn't be geniuses to know that food and sleep are necessary for physical health and stamina; but there may be precious little of both due to circumstances beyond our control.
It's also easy to get so caught up in the demands and decisions that we forget priorities.
We may think about our needs, but other demands supersede.
To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 20, 2016>
"I've stepped to the front of the line."
Although R had beenwidowed for years prior to her elderly mother's death, she oftensaid that after her mother died.
It wasn't until later that it madean impact and I understood the meaning.
I sensed her feeling:no longer was someone ahead of her to protect her.Psychologically, did she still feel her 90+ year-old mother hadbeen  a protector?
a buffer?
a first line of defense?
I wondered.Indeed, she had us: her son and me, her daughter-in-law.
We could and would share her responsibility and be there for her.
That said, she cherished independence and was an intelligent, fully functioning, involved woman.
Although grateful, she must have considered us back-up.
Please visit my other site to view entire post
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 16, 2016>
One reality is that we can't stretch a 24-hour day.
A second reality is that--and we all know this, but easier said than done, those entrusted with caregiving must take care of themselves.
A third reality: it's hard not to push ourselves....just this one time or just a little bit more...but it's not good for us if it must continue over an extended period.
And the last reality--at least for me--is that my time for keeping up with my blog remains in short supply for the time being.
Having set mental markers in my head to warn me of when my ability to remain helpful to anyone, even myself, is at risk--I have asked for help several times since my husband's surgery to replace his aorta and mitral valves on February 4.
To view entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 1, 2016>
With Mother's Day just a week away, the Well column in Tuesday's NY Times, Thriving at Age 70 and Beyond, is timely and worthwhile.... Reading Jane Brody's Thriving at Age 70 and Beyond gives us insights into mothers and grandmothers--and even ourselves; and for creative adult children, it could spark ideas for Mother's Day gifts.
To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 27, 2016>
What a surprise to awaken this morning and find yesterday's I-thought-published post missing---gone, nowhere to be found.
Help!
Aging Parents' goal is to share the best information and some creative ideas to help the elders we care about age as well as possible.
With my husband's recent heart valve surgery, I've been more focused on helpful caregiving ideas and yesterday decided to offer some personal reflections.
For the first time in the history of this blog, they vanished.I had written about stress--our cancelled plans to fly this past Tuesday to warm weather and sign the closing papers for the sale of my husband's mother's home.
Doctors gave the necessary permission two weeks ago, following my husband's heart valve surgery in February.
But all changed at the end of last week when the new mitral valve developed a hole.
To read full post please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 19, 2016>
If our parents live long enough, there will no doubt be times when we are--or will be--hesitant to have them experience more misery and/or pain due to unpleasant procedures.
But it happens.
And if we/they are responsible, the memories can fill us with later regret: the wish-we/they-had-done-differently kind of memories.To begin, it helps to remember we aren't perfect.
Most of us are lay people.
We act out of love, concern, caring and compassion or what people we respect suggest.
That's emotion or instinct.
Even when presented with facts and solid information we can make misjudgments...as can older people.In the case of both my parents, there are things I wish had been different.
Sr. Advisor R, my m-i-l, said several times there were things she wished she had done differently.
For Leo, well-researched "more" worked.
For my Uncle Harry, possibly not understanding long-term implications led to an earlier death.
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 18, 2016>
          2016                                            Easter March 27                                     Passover: April 22-30 Ideas for adding pleasure to the lives of Aging Parents and the Elders We Love Small bunnies add whimsey to spring baskets.
Wouldn't they bring joy to aging parents or to seniors in a care facility?
To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 6, 2016>
Eagles (eaglets) have hatched high up in a tree at the US Arboretum in Washington DC.
Watching live streaming, courtesy of the Arboretum and American Eagle Foundation (the latter supplied photo here) is captivating--wonderful entertainment for all ages, but think about the stimulation for older people!
And then think about those who are homebound or in care facilities.
Take a laptop, notebook, iPad (a cellphone's screen may be a bit small for aging eyes) to aging parents or elderly friends if they don't have one.
If they do have one, email the link below or add the link for them.
To view entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 24, 2016>
As parents age, concerns about heavy-duty caregiving are common.
The NY Times published a powerful piece in early March.
Elizabeth's experience as told to NY Times science/geriatrics-writer/columnist, Paula Span, will resonate with many caregivers, Alzheimer's caregivers or not.
Living with the parents I'm losing to Alzheimer's:two excerpts--     One night recently my dad was so confused, up so many times, and I was exhausted and full of frustration and anger and overwhelming grief.
I just went in there and cried in his arms, begging him, "Please, go back to sleep." He didn't understand, but he was holding me and crying, too, and saying, "I'm so sorry.
I'll do better.
I'll do better." To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 17, 2016>
HAPPY ST. PATRICK'S DAY   Oxalis regnellii (Shamrock) Plants at Trader Joe's March 2016 I've always loved this plant and have written about it in previous posts.
It's easy care: likes good, indirect light; flowers for long periods, then takes a rest; opens in daylight and closes up at night; likes moist, non-soggy soil and its leaves collapse (but plant doesn't die) to tell you when it's too dry and needs immediate watering.
How user-friendly is that?
To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 16, 2016>
Last Monday began with a funeral for Sr. Advisor D, who died unexpectedly a few days before in Florida, where she spent winters.
Her son had been visiting with her for a few weeks and was due to return to NY the next day.
She often said her son helped her age well; indeed they were enjoying a busy schedule in Florida prior to her death.
.Sr.
Advisor D was a mentor to me when I took the counseling position at Scarsdale High School decades ago and remained a dear friend.
She was "up on the latest"--whatever that was--so interesting and fun to be with.
Very bright and well-read (a former honors English teacher), she was an active 90-year-old, who continued to participate in all aspects of life.
This included significant contributions to my blog--until the end.
To view entire post, please visit my other site        https://helpparentsagewell.com/senior-advisors-2/d/
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 8, 2016>
The first thing Deb, the RN-Geriatric Care Manager, said to me during her "courtesy call" at the hospital was something like:"Get everything in order at home: fresh sheets and towels on bed and in bathroom; wash laundry, your hair; bring in a supply of groceries; do everything you need to do because you won't have time to do it initially."
Excellent advice.
The following suggestions came from healthcare workers in the hospital--or from what worked well for me: To view entire post please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 3, 2016>
How many times have people said "You must take care of yourself?"
when caring for an elderly loved one who's hospitalized.
There's stress.
...too many things to take care of, possibly many people giving advice, definitely emotionally draining.
I'm convinced the following 13  suggestions ease the experience: To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 28, 2016>
While I've been working on a post about successfully dealing with a loved one's hospital experience, I was unsure about how to best orchestrate the transition from the hospital to home for my husband--even though I'd spoken to the social worker on the floor (who said I knew everything he was telling me so I should simply call with any additional questions).That said I wasn't comfortable, wondering: Could I handle the physical requirements of someone who'd been in the cocoon of intensive care levels, then a few days of rehab and still take care of the food preparation, normal house keeping and leaving the house to do necessary errands that first week?
I also remembered something I learned, in my two years of teaching French (before I began counseling): not to say to my students "just raise your hand If you don't understand."
A very bright student politely asked "How do you know what to ask if you don't know what you don't know?"
Decades later, I remember that.
Thus, I phoned Deb.
To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, February 11, 2016>
                 In medical situations where we're dependent on others                and have no control, "thank you" may be our best ally.
Really sick people, especially aging parents, make us sad, stressed and dependent on smart professionals to address our parents' needs.
Reactions to serious family health issues and how we navigate the emotional roller coaster obviously vary.
One size never fits all.
Yet there's one constant that's a win-win for aging parents, health care professionals and their support people, and us-- To view complete post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 1, 2016>
 Nuns Crossing 5th Ave. in NYC Sunday morning after January 2016 Blizzard Seeing these agile, apparently hardy nuns navigating snow and slush to cross 5th Avenue last Sunday, triggered my long ago thinking about the MacArthur Foundation research and the Nun Study.
Although I don't remember an emphasis on "active engagement with life" in the Nun Study, I remember thinking at the time that nuns are part of a community experiencing  social connectedness and are actively engaged; and I wondered if that also helped them age well.
Today the importance of connections with others in helping people age well is well recognized.
Nuns don't have children, but they do have a community which supports and connects with them throughout life.
Our parents, on the other hand, have children, but their community--their supports--dwindle as they age, leaving lonely, unhappy elders with adult children who often live many miles away with job and family responsibilities.
In addition, many parents don't want to impose on their children "who have their own lives."
And few older people want to give up their homes and the independence that they feel, even when they could benefit from the extra help and socialization.
(We all know this.)
The question remains--What to do?
Six Suggestions To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 26, 2016>
Over 60 million people were under blizzard, winter storm or freezing rain warnings this weekend.
How many were elderly?
"We're in the age of extreme weather," NYC Mayor de Blasio declared on TV Sunday, suggesting we need to be ready for future weather events.
Since winter storm Jonas has dominated the news this weekend, bringing record and near-record snow to the northeast urban corridor, I'm wondering----How many of the 60+million people in its path are old; how many of them live independently; and how many live far from their adult children?
The weather and the 11,600+ flights cancelled since Friday, can understandably cause stress for adult children who have elders they care about....perhaps even more concern if elderly parents live far away and are in harm's way.
Indeed, I remember the helpless feeling when I was in that situation years ago.
10 suggestions follow that alleviate--or at least lessen--concern for elders' safety 1.
Contact them of course2.
Keep your parents' neighbors' cell phone numbers in a handy place.
In the event parents don't live near, neighbors can check on them if necessary.They may need to monitor and let you know if mom decides to go for a walk or shovel snow when she shouldn't.3.
Be as certain as possible, without being condescending or bossy of course, that aging parents are prepared for this "age of extreme weather."
(Personally check or put on your to-do list to check--or take care of--the following ahead of time) If the Electricity Goes Out--                                                    4.
Cell phones--at the ready--may be the only way to maintain contact when land lines are down.
Make certain elders are comfortable using their fully-charged phones.5.
Suggest /nicely remind that they keep their phone fully charged in case of power outages.
(Elders are usually not as compulsive as younger people about keeping their phones charged.)
Gift elders with the inexpensive, small, portable charger/external back-up battery pack for their cell phone--making certain they understand how easily the charger's input and output works.
(Isn't a reserve power source insurance?)
To view entire post visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 19, 2016>
   How smartphones help aging parents, the elderly and us age well   NYC 86th St.
Subway ad 2016 (above).
Close up of text under "The doctor will see you now" (below).
Upon exiting the subway last week, this ad greeted me.
We are to assume, I believe, that unknown medical diagnosticians, presumably MD's, are at the ready to diagnose unknown people's health issues after receiving photos taken by--and emailed from--a mobile device.
Over three years ago, my dermatologist's assistant asked if I had an iPhone and could take a picture of something on my face, email it and perhaps save an office visit---and time (and money).
What an unexpected response to my calling to make an appointment to have her look at a little spot.
It made so much sense.
Indeed I had the "nothing-to-worry-about" reply from her office within the hour.
How efficient--and reassuring--is that!
To view entire post please go to my other site  
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 10, 2016>
Idea for a One-of-a Kind Centerpiece to celebrate elders'--or anyone's--birthdays    Today is a family birthday party.
Aren't birthdays an uplifting time--at least for the person who isn't dreading getting older?
Even then, having the kind of party older people want (Click here or Birthday Posts tab above) softens the reality.Years ago I learned from Eloise that floral arrangements--in this case centerpieces with living plant material--can be put in anything that can hold water.
FYI--Eloise (mentioned in early posts) was a take-charge, smart, out-of-the-box thinker who died in her sleep at age 95.
(Her husband predeceased her by 4 years whereupon she immediately put DNR signs everywhere in their home.
To view entire post please visit my other site  
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 3, 2016>
As we think about helping parents and elders we care about age well, we know support of friends is priceless.
We're also aware of the research showing connections with others help people age well.
Neither "friends" nor "others"  is defined as "pets," yet in a quiz show couldn't everyone complete the phrase "a man's best friend is... his dog.
"As the old year ends and a new year begins, I focus on the continuum of life, and the fact that helping parents age well continues throughout the life cycle--until the very end.
In an effort to help pet-loving aging parents, who face hospice care and-- on top of everything else--worry about their pets, I'm calling attention to the nonprofit Pet Peace of Mind program.
To view entire post, please visit my other blog. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 27, 2015>
First posted in 2009--with variations each year The words and melody from the radio filled my car.
A winter wonderland was outside.
Kids, amid shrieks of laughter and merriment, were sledding down the hill at the high school on anything large enough to sit on.
I'm certain school vacation is adding to this happiest of times.
My counseling background kicks in.
I know that holidays aren't the happiest of times for many old people.
So I decide to phone some elderly friends, simply to say "hello" and ask "how are you?"
Let me share what I learned--  It's the happiest time of the year for children-- who have none of the responsibilities of adulthood.
It's the happiest time when elders and younger family members can be together--feeling the warmth--sharing, and reminiscing.
The excitement of the children and grandchildren provides a background of energy and optimism.
And yet-- "The holidays are a time when our mind drifts back to past Christmases that were happy times.
It's a sentimental time," recalls one 80-year-old widow.
"It's a wonderful time when families can get together, yet a lot of people are completely alone.
As people get older, they have experienced losses.
Especially for those who've lost their mates, other people's happiness can be a reminder of the losses we've incurred.
We're just more vulnerable to that kind of thing when we get older."
To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 26, 2015>
WISHING EVERYONE A   VERY MERRY CHRISTMAS from Help!
Aging Parents.. ...And a reminder of how much a simple phone call means to a lonesome, frail or isolated elderly person today...or any day.  
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 23, 2015>
 "We're like the flotsam and the jetsam, we're not needed any more."
Willy, a retired, elderly physician-friend of Dad's Parenting mentally capable parents who have slowed down seems very wrong.
Yet one aspect of parenting, protecting, seems completely justified for both young and old.We protect those at both ends of the life cycle from danger.
Are we aware that we also protect children's believing and that protecting elders' believing can be beneficial for old people too?Believing comes naturally to children.
Don't they believe all things are possible?
Yet the realities of life dim that optimism in many as they age, and the retired physician's quote above is a feeling a lot of old people share.
To view entire post please visit my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 14, 2015>
As I look back over all the creative, innovative gifts/vacations etc.
we arranged for our parents, to me this was close to--if not--the best.
Why?
It provided Dad connections with contemporaries, fun, little work, and not much expense.
It seemed even better to me because I was a far-away living child--always wanting to make the most of the time I had with my aging parents.
At the last minute I had the gift idea and followed through on it before I lost my nerve.
To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 6, 2015>
  How many older people have become Facebook users  as a way to stay connected with grandchildren?
Since studies show that connections with others are one of the most important factors in aging well, how fortunate that technology now makes this easier.
As we think about holiday gifts for elders who are grandparents--think GRANDCHILDREN.
Clearly the ad agencies understand this!
Indeed, a current TV ad features a sweet, kind-looking, elderly gentleman, sitting in a chair, proudly telling the world he has a (named) brand of technology so that now he can keep in touch with his grandson.
Obviously ad agencies have compiled data showing what appeals to the majority.
This post could be very short, simply suggesting that we use our imaginations, understanding that any gift that provides a connection to grandchildren is what the majority of grandparents want.
That said, here are broad examples......  ....To read entire post, please go to my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 29, 2015>
This is one of the few times in decades that Thanksgiving dinner has not been at our home.
Now that Sr. Advisor R has died, the celebration has passed to the younger generation (in their 40's).
"Every twist of the  kaleidoscope moves us all in turn."
--Elton John   To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 15, 2015>
How often have we found ourselves waiting in a long, slow line for the Ladies' Restroom--then finally entering a vacated stall that is unacceptable or even disgusting?
And how extra-bad is it if our aging--or old--mother or grandmother is with us and must deal with it too?
A friend (I think) just said: "Your blog on a practical, less-than-tasty subject treats it with good taste, I think."
There is a solution.
To view entire post, please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 10, 2015>
  Honoring Those Who Served ~ 5th Avenue New York City     Again we honor those who serve, have served, and made the ultimate sacrifice.
We also learn that ongoing research focusing on the "transition of veterans from military to civilian life," is underway at Teachers College, Columbia U.
Today's just-received email, Beyond PTSD: Exploring the stresses of veterans' transition back to civilian life gives details about the newly established Resilience Center for Veterans & Families.
Also check out this short, well-done, video that spans the generations--grandfather,  grandsons and those in between.
It caught my attention this year.
To view entire post, please visit my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 9, 2015>
                         Call Hospice for Your Mom!I meddled!
A former neighbor sounded awful when I phoned the other night.
She's very old; has had cancer successfully treated over decades, but it sounds like the end may be near.
There's no "maybe" about the pain she says she has had for some time.
There's an aide with her 24/7 so I didn't think hospice was involved, although it sounded like they should be.
Bottom line: Calling hospice--or suggesting someone contact hospice--may be uncomfortable.
But calling sooner--rather than later--offers professional, appropriate comfort to patient and family and a better chance for a satisfying ending.
So many have said "I wish I'd called hospice sooner."
To read entire post, please go to my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 31, 2015>
HAPPY HALLOWEEN 2015 IN NYC Halloween decor and costumed kiddies holding their parents' hands are ever-present in NYC today.
For young and old who are mobile, the side-streets of NY offer everything--except the inflatables seen on front yards in the suburbs.
The ghoulish and creepy displays on the upper eastside--just a block east of Central Park made the news.
Very young, pushed in strollers by parents (and often accompanied by their dogs), and those older who could walk, stopped to view the spooky surroundings.
We share some here--  Please go to my other site to view entire post. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 28, 2015>
 "Look at older patients instead of typing notes into a computer, take more time with them and answer their questions..." Case Western Reserve Medical School recently held its annual panel discussion, "Life Over 90,"  for their 2nd-year-medical students.
The 90+-year-old panel members shared experience and advice--equally instructive for anyone whose elderly loved ones go to doctors.
And isn't that  true for everyone?
To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 18, 2015>
2015 Pumpkins for Elders  Pumpkins with interesting stems and the potential for whimsey make uplifting October gifts.
And once again they've been given to older people this past week, the oldest being 97-year-old J.
To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 11, 2015>
NY Fashion Week 2015 Shows Style is Ageless* Look Better, Feel Better Women  aged 77 and 90--- runway models?
Here Wilma and Phyllis model  at NY Fashion Week 2015 Past posts (Fashionistas or Frumpy-Dumpies) have addressed women's appearance over the years.
Clearly older women can look very good!
And why not?
Life has changed for women since the olden days and NY recognized this during Fashion Week last month.
Senior Advisor R always looked in order and Senior Advisor D, at 90, still looks stylish--not runway stylish--but in style.
How do they do it?
It's not the money spent--rather  it's THE FIT and the time, energy, and desire to look good.
To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 4, 2015>
Preventing Independent, Proud Elders From Feeling Foolish,  and Ashamed, and Possibly impoverished *  Most of us would quickly get rid of a scam email requesting we send money for a friend whose wallet was lost in London.
No one wants to look/feel stupid--specially when intentions are the best.
We'd recognize the scam immediately.
But there's a more insidious ploy with serious consequences that I was unaware of until I read the just-received November issue of ConsumerReports.
Scam artists and con (wo)men targeting seniors is not news.
What is news is reading about the emotional damage to elders-- on top of financial loss.
"A Crying Shame-Seniors and their families lose $3 billion a year to con artists.
What can we do to stop them?"
arrived in our mailbox Thursday.
These scams/frauds are so carefully conceived and executed that it's easy to understand how aging parents--indeed all elders and possibly some of us kind-hearted souls--could be sucked in.
But it's the emotional fall-out--that we're unaware of and is non-fiction reading here--that I find compelling.
To read entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 28, 2015>
                        Family Caregivers for their Aging Parents                                are Worth Their Weight in GoldValuing "old people"--included in Pope Francis's speech--shouldn't have surprised me.
"Old people."
(At 78 is Pope Francis old?)
Those words made an impact, while watching his presentations to Congress on TV, and again--while watching, I believe, his UN speech, on TV in New York.And today I was told (by someone who hadn't read the article) that a high-respected financial weekly, Barron's, came out today promoting a "Caring For Aging Parents" article.
Is this a coincidence?
In any event, I was curious about its contents.
........................
Please visit my other site to view entire post.
NYC's last 2 days have been filled with Pope Francis (less than 3 months until his 79th birthday).
......In the right place at the right time, I share this iPhone-taken-photo on a NYC side-street.
To read entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 20, 2015>
Past posts about cleaning out my parents' home--basically alone--after they died had one purpose: to offer the best, objective, helpful information, dismissing the emotional for the most part.
They didn't emphasize the emotional benefits because I know well that one person's experience does not qualify as valid for many.Recent events, however, make me think the emotional benefit for me, could be many people's experience, although they're unaware.
Left alone in one's growing-up home with things and memories --and a lot of work seems overwhelming!
That said, looking back, it was one of the most precious gifts one can have if we're fortunate enough to be cast into this position.
To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 13, 2015>
First, the background for the most perfect and meaningful birthday celebration I ever attended.
She mentioned the old days with obvious nostalgia, when women were invited to people's homes for luncheons and teas.
The younger woman, B, listened intently.
The older woman described how special it was-the friendliness, the sharing, the carefully-planned and prepared food.The sincerity and vivid recollection made an impact on the younger woman, whose lifestyle included a thirteen-year-old, two college-aged children, and her two difficult aging parents.The older woman was Sr. Advisor, R, my m-i-l, a remarkable woman whose wisdom, sayings, diet, and way of living life have  provided material for many posts.
Recalling times gone by and their sweet moments, these recollections still brought R happiness-more than half a century later.
B was moved by the conversation.
***  R didn't want a celebration for her 95th birthday.
This year was different.
B, in her 40's, planned a 96th birthday luncheon.
11 guests (ages 13-96).
The hostess's 13-year-old daughter wanted to be there as did her 25-year-old sister (with a recent ankle fracture).The large dining room table, beautifully set, was extended to seat all the guests.....  To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 6, 2015>
          ...and if a person smells, how do you tell him/her?
Last week "The Truth about 'Old People Smell,'" awaited me in my gmail.
Coincidentally I had just posted about how often elders should bathe so I was curious about "the truth."
In the end I was left wondering.
What I'm not wondering about is the importance of proper hygiene for elders.
Well-respected, documented research confirms connections with others are essential in aging well and I daresay people who are smelly don't attract others.
This brings up the importance of doing the awkward favor: informing someone you care about that he or she smells (or whatever)....and the dilemma:                                        What to say.
How to say it.
*     *     *                           to view entire post, please go to my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 30, 2015>
                                  Walk More.
Sit LessHow limiting is life for those with curtailed mobility?Look around...so many people with canes and walkers as our population ages.
Based on the Tufts U. publication-reprinted below-it seems their numbers would lessen if the elderly couch potatoes we care about (as well as those of us who now spend hours sitting at a desk), make it a point to take breaks for a brief walk.
What could be easier?
The importance of older peoples' walking is nothing new to longtime readers of my blog.
"If you begin a daily walking program at age 45, you could delay immobility to 90 and beyond.
If you become a couch potato at 45 and remain so, immobility can encroach as early as 60." So says Mark Lachs, author of Treat Me, Not My Age.
To view entire post, please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 24, 2015>
Summer heat makes daily showering/bathing a necessity for many.
But what about  elderly people's more fragile skin?I remember my Dad's talking about his oldest sister--in her early 90's.
She had recently moved to assisted living and her daughters (Dad's nieces) had complained to him that she was only allowed to shower once--or twice (I've forgotten--it was many years ago) a week.
I was young then; no doubt overheard the conversation and found it strange.
One wonders if assisted-living administrators require their "residents" to have an aide assist them when bathing or showering?
And/or is the two-day-a-week bathing/showering limit to save money and time?
Or is it better for elderly skin not to have too much soap and water exposure?Sr.
Advisor D, now 90,  to the rescue.
She went for her annual dermatologist appointment recently and put the question to her dermatologist--a well-known "Top Doc" in Westchester County (NY), who said in essence: To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 11, 2015>
EFFICIENCY, VALUE.
AND EMOTIONAL CONSIDERATIONSPhase 5.
Cleaning Out--Unwanted Books and Valuables.
In both homes there were unwanted things that we thought had value.
In most cases, upon checking, the value was far less than we thought.I don't know how "value" affects the donation slips nonprofit organizations willingly provide, where we are responsible for writing in the value of each item.
I somehow have wondered for many years how the IRS looks at that.I do know, since we didn't live close to our parents, keeping unwanted inherited stuff takes up room, can be costly to store or ship.
Thus we usually gave it away in hopes someone else or a nonprofit would appreciate it.
(Didn't bother with the donation slip.
)Some of my parents' books had religious themes.
I took those to the care facility run by the religious institution.
They were grateful to have them.
Since the famous Powell's Book Store was close, I took some books there.
However, carrying heavy books for the small amount of money they generated, wasn't worth it to me.
(Powell's link says they cover freight costs.)
To view entire post, please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 8, 2015>
Two family homes cleaned out in 12 months.
Whether this makes me an expert at emptying elderly parents' homes is questionable; but I am experienced and more efficient.
Here's what I've learned: To read entire post please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 6, 2015>
Our Role in Combating Social Isolation As those we care about enter old age, we tend to visit them--in their home; in assisted living; in a rehab center--or nursing home if allowed.
Why not make the effort to take them out and give them a change of scenery?
Otherwise, doesn't our visit usually go something like this: We visit.
We make conversation.
They listen and respond.
They remain in place.
We leave.It's easier for us for many reasons, but is it better for them?
Taking them out provides:    To view entire post please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 2, 2015>
Aging Alone and Well.
Defying the Statistics"Do you like being alone?"
This question begins "A Solitary Life Carries Risk" in the NY Times "Well" section.
I'd saved it since March.
While it's aimed at us, based on research following around 3.4 million people over 7 years, it concludes "Although living alone can offer conveniences and advantages for an individual, physical health is not among them." Indeed the lead researcher says  "Social isolation significantly predicts risk for premature mortality comparable to other well established risk factors.
"If married or with a partner, it's inevitable one of us will be left alone.
How did Sr. Advisor R, who lived alone since being widowed at 50, defy these sobering statistics?
A simplistic answer could be that she maintained social connections, which all studies have found is important in aging well.
That said, here's the additional-- To view entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 27, 2015>
Filling Out The "Patient's Request for Medical Payment Form"                               12/2015--IMPORTANT          Read important updates when link to "other site" below is clicked--             some changes added in red to original text here    Your doctor doesn't "take" Medicare.
He or she has opted out.
You have Medicare Part B coverage.
You've paid your bill.
You should have been given a copy of the bill along with a copy of your doctor's letter, signed and dated, this includes date of service as well as the date your doctor declined Medicare participation.
However, at bottom of last  paragraph on opt-out form (easy to miss when reading the long paragraphs) there's a place for patient's signature.
If you sign it, you've agreed not to take Medicare reimbursement.
It may not impact secondary insurance, but you may need to apply directly to secondary insurer.
Also some secondary insurance policies are tied to Medicare's approving benefits.
So CHECK WITH YOUR SECONDARY INSURER.
Now it's time to file for your reimbursement.
My understanding is that one can file up to a year after the date after the medical service--ie.
7/7/14-7/7/15.
But why wait so long?The following gives the best chance to succeed on the first try.
Also remember if you have secondary coverage, Medicare will forward the necessary information to them when you check that box.
If Medicare declines reimbursement their declining will be on the forwarded form so CHECK as stated above.
To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 25, 2015>
Some doctors don't "take" Medicare.
12/2015--IMPORTANT Read important updates when "other site" link below is clicked--some changes added in red to original text here  They've chosen to be excluded from Medicare Program participation.
Nevertheless, people with Part B Medicare coverage can submit claims forms directly to  Medicare for reimbursement from these doctors, regardless of a doctor's Medicare affiliation, IF THEY DON'T SIGN WHERE IT SAYS "PATIENTS SIGNATURE" at bottom of last paragraph on opt-out form.
It's easy to miss this when reading the long paragraphs.
If you sign it, you've agreed not to take Medicare reimbursement.
It may not impact secondary insurance, but you may need to apply directly to secondary insurer.
Also some secondary insurance policies are tied to Medicare's approving benefits.
So CHECK WITH YOUR SECONDARY INSURER.
It just entails a bit more work from you/your parents if you're submitting.
Helping parents age well clearly includes their healthcare.
And no doubt many parents have Medicare coverage, using doctors who "take" Medicare and do the paperwork so Medicare can reimburse.
And this works pretty well.Understand what happens when a parent with Medicare coverage uses a doctor who has opted out of Medicare Program participation and thus, doesn't "take" Medicare?
Some doctors in NY and probably other large cities have decided to be excluded from Medicare participation.
To view entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 22, 2015>
          Massachusetts General Hospital [Massachusetts General] Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston is ranked #1 Hospital in US News's Best Hospitals 2015-16 issue, published July 21st.
In Geriatrics Mayo Clinic in Rochester (not to be confused with their other sites) ranked #1, followed by  UCLA Medical Center (Calif.) #2; Mt.
Sinai (NYC) #3; Massachusetts General (Boston) #4; and Johns Hopkins (Maryland) #5How is this information helpful?
To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 14, 2015>
My aunt Millie (Dad's sister) died in Oregon, 3 months short of her 100th birthday.
Dad, who was 91, was on the next morning's flight from California to Oregon-alone.
To backtrack- My husband and I were in California for my high school reunion.
I stayed on after the pre-reunion dinner while my husband drove my dad and a classmate's 98-year-old mother back to where they were staying.
They were met by news of Aunt Millie's death.My husband, a man of responsible action, immediately made a plane reservation for Dad to fly to Oregon to join his family the next morning.
Dad had already begun packing his small case by the time I came in.While that seemed logical to us, it astonished our friends.
They were aghast at the fact we were "letting" Dad fly by himself at his age.
We never gave it a second thought.
Were we in denial?
To view entire post please visit my other site   
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 7, 2015>
Old People Can Fly Alone.
My Octogenarian Parents Did; so did my MIL at age 98.
But navigating the airport is stressful.
What stresses seniors (and many younger travelers)--at airports?
There's a certain tension connected with flying today.
Excluding fear of flying, it includes 7 stressors: To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 4, 2015>
INDEPENDENCE DAY, JULY 4TH--hard  won, as history shows As we strive to help elders age well, aren't we also reminded of how important independence is to each individual throughout a lifetime.
*  *  * Will post Sunday.
See you tomorrow.
http://helpparentsagewell.com/2015/07/04/happy-4th-of-july-from-help-aging-parents/
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, June 26, 2015>
Sr. Advisor R, my mil, was a poster child for aging independently, unselfishly and well.
She said, to the extent she could, she'd done everything; helped everyone; and given to those she wanted to give.
She was ready to go.
It was no secret.
And I've been thinking-since her timely death last week at 101-about how she managed life so well.R lived by the following:   1.Take care of yourself (or you won't be able to take care of anything else).2.
Be responsible3.
Don't abuse yourself.
(You get enough from the outside)4.
Know when to say "no."5.
Simplify (as you age) --to view entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 15, 2015>
Young travelers may easily navigate airports but it's...  ...Not so easy for aging parents and old people.
Many elders are obviously not at their peak physically--with --poorer vision, --poorer hearing --less energy than younger travelers.
TSA instructions that include lifting carry-ons to a conveyer belt for inspection can be problematical for elders with weak muscles.
Taking a carry-on or pulley up and down escalators challenges balance.
The myriad directional signs for gates can be confusing.
Long walks to distant gates wear elders out.
And important loudspeaker announcements--especially made by those with foreign accents--are often not heard or not understood.
To view entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 9, 2015>
  Cake by Esperanza  Round-up of 50 Gifts for Fathers and Grandfathers continued   A tie!?
When men "dressed" to go out ties were a most popular Father's Day gift.
While still a popular gift, today's more casual dress code makes me wonder about the future of ties...they aren't listed under "Accessories/Clothing" in part 1.
However, this Father's Day Cake, complete with tie, could be a creative answer for those who bake and like using marzipan.
Can anything top making this cake as a loving tribute to a great Dad or Grandad?
For those who don't bake, my round-up continues.....
Hearing: Hearing loss is a problem for older people and for those who communicate with them.
To view entire post, please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 24, 2015>
Memorial Day Weekend 2015... ...Is there a better time to have meaningful conversations with the older--and the oldest--people in our lives?
The commonality of experience, hardship, and sacrifice for country, is shared by countless families over countless years.
Some memories lie deep within our elders--aging parents and grandparents and no doubt people who never married.
Some memories may still haunt; some may never be spoken of.
We know this from movies and books we've read, if we haven't experienced it in our own families.
Never-the-less there's a positive for those of us with aging friends and family members as well as those for whom we're caregivers--if these elders like to talk about the past.
It's the opportunity to ask them meaningful questions that convey genuine interest ... To view entire post please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 23, 2015>
Our Elders, Aging Parents and Grandparents: Journalist Tom Brokaw highlighted their specialness, coining the expression "The Greatest Generation" for his popular book about them.
On May 19, 2015 countless aging parents and grandparents (and I) visited the World War II Memorial to pay tribute and to remember.
Part of the National Park Service, the World War II Memorial definitely does not glorify war.
It does glorify the deep-seated values of our elders and a time in the history of the United States that affected each and every person.
And we--or at least I--find most old people don't hesitate to talk about the WWII war years.
In fact reminiscing seems to be a popular pastime with the elderly in spite of all the adversities they've experienced.
(Depression and war to name two.)
To view entire post, please go to my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 21, 2015>
 Help!
Aging Parents voted "One of the 20 Best Alzheimer's Blogs of the Year"  Yesterday we took Amtrak to the Washington, DC area.
Just before leaving I learned that, for the second year in a row, Healthline honors our blog as one of its 20 top Alzheimer's blogs of 2015.
Help!
Aging Parents' inclusion on this year's "Best" list has special meaning for two reasons:  First, it's the only blog on the list that doesn't have Alzheimer's or dementia as a major focus.
To view entire post, please visit my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, May 13, 2015>
At a certain age I think it's safe to say everyone--aging parents and us-- thinks about memory loss.
Many boomers and seniors play bridge, learn a new language, and train their brains using innovative technology, hoping to stave off memory loss.But the effectiveness of brain-training technology seems to be questionable in real life, according to AARP's 4/14/ 15 Brain Health Blog, "Major Report Shows What Works and What Doesn't for Better Brain Health," written by Elizabeth Agnvall.
It's based upon an April 2015-released Institute of Medicine of the National Academies report, COGNITIVE AGING--Progress in Understanding and Opportunities for Action co-sponsored by AARP, the National Institute on Aging, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and other government and nonprofit organizations.
Visit my other site for this report's findings re: what                    helps prevent, hurts, and doesn't help memory loss. 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 8, 2015>
Note: This shouldn't be a surprise to our readers.
Three years ago we posted: Aging Parents: The Mother's Day Gift Mothers and Grandmother's Value Most.
Over and over we heard "time with children and family" as the answer to the objective Mother's Day gift question we asked.
While admittedly our sample was very small as I wrote in that post, if you click the preceding link you might find the responses "hit home."
While the survey below's sample of 155 is also small, it includes the value (or not) of technology.
I spoke with the person responsible for sending me this information and think it fits nicely with what I've experienced, especially opening the e-card.
Thus--                   Survey Shows Half of Senior Moms May Not Get                            Their Mother's Day Wish This Year                         To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 4, 2015>
Spending time with family--children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren--is what most older mothers want for Mother's Day.
Being taken out for Mother's Day dinner with them adds to the pleasure.What they don't appreciate are gifts that become clutter----that they really don't need or want--that give them "problems" if they're old because they need to figure out where to put them----where to store them,--how not to hurt the giver's feelings, and--how to get rid of them.
10 Mother's Day Gifts--that don't last forever and are         thoughtful, eye-appealing, delicious, indulgent, pampering,                                           practical, exciting To view entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 27, 2015>
Eileen Fisher has shops throughout the US (click Store locator)).
Her high quality, easy-care sweaters and tops look good on all body types and all ages.
Forget that the models are always young and cool-looking.
60 and 70-year-olds, especially larger women, love the sweaters (some come in brighter colors).
The proportions are "generous."
"Small" can easily translate to EF's "PS" or "PM ."
Because it may be harder to get the size right, if mom doesn't already wear Eileen Fisher clothes, don't buy on-line.
While styles are  "today"--possibly surprising--many are perfect for older women.
I'm guessing (based on one pair of slacks that I've worn for a decade) all of her  knit slacks have elastic waist bands and fit well on skinny or  overweight women.
Paired with a loose top and loosely fit cardigan  sweater, muffin tops--as well as flabby arms--vanish.
Try to find them on sale at......
Please go to my other site to view entire post 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 23, 2015>
 Look good, feel good.
New clothes can lift spirits                                      and that helps parents age well.
Most women like to look good, yet aging issues, including lack of energy, may dampen a woman's enthusiasm for buying clothes.
Mother's Day provides a chance to update older women's wardrobes.
For fashionista's daughters, shopping for Mothers is fun; for others it's a chance to help frumpy-dumpies look good.
My 101 year-old mil's favorite clothing catalogs (now on-line) are below, carrying a wide variety of  smart, well-priced clothing and accessories for women ages 50+++.
No wonder they're popular with many older women, as seen by the commenters' ages.
Please visit my other site to view entire post  http://helpparentsagewell.com/2015/04/21/aging-parents-mothers-day-gifts-fashionista-or-frumpy-dumpy-whats-a-daughter-to-do/
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 14, 2015>
.....A great Mother's Day Gift--for Mothers and Grandmothers thoughtful, personal, one-of-a-kind I love reusing stuff and this wonderfully-decorated picture frame caught my eye several years ago at Linda's home.
She decorated it for her mother with an old photo of the two of them, surrounded by various mementos and "stuff."
Click photo to enlarge.
Personalization possibilities are limited only by our imagination.
It's inexpensive and easy to make--just get the frame, buy some glue, and gather all the meaningful mememtos, unmatched earrings, and old jewelry and buttons you can find.
To view entire post and simple instructions, visit my other site.  
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 12, 2015>
FORCING ELDERS?
Can we force resistant parents to do what's in their best interest when they're dead set against it, maintain our relationship, and have no guilt?
SOME STRATEGIES TO AVOID FORCE, GET COMPLIANCE To view entire post, please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 9, 2015>
SHOULD WE FORCE ELDERS TO DO  WHAT WE THINK IS BEST?
The short answer is "no"-assuming aging parents have what 101-year-old Sr. Advisor R calls "a good head on their shoulders" and they're doing nothing that threatens life and limb.
If we try to force something that even suggests limiting parents'  independence or autonomy, we enter dangerous emotional territory....... What is the motivation to force elders to do something?
1.  our feeling about parents' judgment2.
the consequences of-and for-our relationship with parents (earlier, now, future)3.
Parents' age, health, near-accidents or scary events, a doctor's recommendation or friends'  recommendations may contribute.Possibly omitted, however, is this thought- To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, April 3, 2015>
Passover and Easter: Another chance to lift elders' spirits and Help Parents Age Well  Easter and Passover celebrate miracles.
While we can't make miracles, showing thoughtfulness to our elders is precious.
(Actually it can be a miracle if normally unthoughtful family members decide to "buy in.")
And adding interest to life helps parents and the elders we care about age well.
Grocery stores, drug stores, and Dollar-type stores have countless inexpensive items for Easter baskets.
A little cash and a little creativity, and ribbon and some cellophane if you like, can turn an ordinary basket into an unexpected surprise that lifts spirits and brings smiles.
A bottle of wine, a and a box of matzos anchor Passover baskets nicely.
Candy, flowers and/or green plants are a happy addition to all holiday baskets.
To view entire post, please visit my other site                          .
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 2, 2015>
11% of family caregivers report that caregiving has caused their physical health to deteriorate.
[The National Alliance for Caregiving and AARP--2009), Caregiving in the U.S. National Alliance for Caregiving.
Washington, DC.]
- Updated: November 2012   Family caregivers who are in good health are in a better position to help parents age well.
No surprise here.
Reading the statistics about family caregivers' health several years ago was sobering.
The Family Caregiver Alliance's  2012 "Selective Care Statistics Fact Sheet," reports: "of those caring for someone aged 65+, the average age is 63 years with one third of these caregivers in fair to poor health."
The November 2012 report's fact sheet is easy-to-read but long.
However, it's well-organized by topics--eg.
gender, age, impact on working female caregivers, gender and care tasks--making selective reading easy.
Example:  To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 31, 2015>
 Estranged Mother and Son Gossipy posts are a rarity-if ever-on my blog.
That said, being an Elton John fan, the Daily Mail's article interested me, most especially because of his elderly mother's seemingly very sound reasoning, which gives clues as to why-at 90- she appears to have aged very well.Money, of course, helps.
While she obviously knows how to dress and look good and throw a party, she's articulate, still has a good mind, and is certainly in touch with her feelings.
When one lives a long life, regardless of economic circumstances, major losses and big disappointments are a part of it.
The way they are dealt with certainly affects aging well and happy-or not.
(Note that the author of the Daily Mail's article, Why my son Elton hasn't spoken to me for seven years, says Elton's mother, Ms. Farebrother, "was happy for our conversation to be recorded and indeed has approved every word of this article.")                    To view entire post, please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, March 27, 2015>
"Joan Lunden on Challenges, Guilt and Caregiving.
Her breast cancer battle and selfless life story are inspiring."
Reblogged from this week's nextavenue, PBS's online newsletter.
Photo from JoanLunden.com ...Lunden's life has been a series of triumphs and challenges.
As a young girl, she lost her father, a cancer surgeon, in a plane crash.
As she began her career as a TV broadcast journalist 30 years ago, she also became a caregiver both to her brother, who had health complications from type 2 diabetes, and to her mother, who was eventually diagnosed with dementia.
What Lunden didn't know at the time, she says, is that caring for her brother and mother simultaneously is when her caregiving journey began...........
Please go to my other site to view entire post. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 22, 2015>
Stress accompanies caregiving...Yet caregiver stress differs from ordinary stress, like that from the work place.
Its "ingredients" differ.
Love, caring, devotion, loyalty, pushing oneself to--and beyond--the limit.
While granted there is satisfaction, frustration, anger, resentment and fatigue are common byproducts.
They generate stress.
Can non-careivers appreciate caregiver stress?Unlike Supreme Court Justice's Potter Stewart's famous pornography quote: "I know it when I see it," I believe we can only know caregiver stress if we've experienced it.
With so much information about reducing caregiver stress  (about 17,700,000 items on Google; 1.990,000 on Yahoo) shouldn't we have learned to control it by now?Three apparent roadblocks:1, One size doesn't fit all (neither the elders we care for--nor us)2.
Non-caregiving family members often can't/don't appreciate the stress, and don't help.3.
We're often not very good at asking for--no insisting on--help when we need it.
Is giving up "ownership" difficult?
(True, they may not do as good a job as we.)
To read entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 17, 2015>
Oxalis Regnelli --Shamrocks at Trader Joe's in Arizona.
Bring interesting, fun to watch, blooming-year-round, easy-care Shamrock plants to elders for St. Patrick's Day.
Green or purplish leaves that open in the morning and close at night, they bring a little life into the home.
Seemingly reduced to $2.99--don't they make great last-minute (or even extra) St. Patrick's Day gifts for aging parents--or anyone we care about?
PS These plants were unavailable in NYC last week.
Perhaps because of  late arrival (although I heard they were available in AZ last week),  they are reduced--at least in this AZ store.
ENJOY A SPIRITED ST. PATRICK'S DAY.  
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 15, 2015>
When parents are old--healthy or not--can we plan vacations very far in advance?...Very far away?
Do we dare to go on vacation?March: Vacation advertising increases.
It looks enticing, yet caution often fills our thoughts and precedes our making a commitment.
Can we risk going?
If our elders are going to miss us, do we feel guilty?
Do we have confidence in the person who will care for them and contact us if problems arise?
We can decide to afford trip cancellation insurance.
That covers one aspect.
Yet our uncertainty  remains:--Do we forgo a needed, well-earned or simply badly-wanted vacation?--Will guilt and concern weigh on us emotionally and taint the trip?A previously planned trip to Italy with friends presented this dilemma.
We went....
Please visit my other site to view entire post 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 8, 2015>
St. Patrick's Day.
Another opportunity to make elderly people happy: happiness created by anticipation if we've planned ahead to do something with them; unexpected happiness from an unexpected gift or communication.
And you don't have to be Irish to participate.
A NYC ad campaign, ubiquitous in the NYC subways throughout the '60's and 70's, proclaimed: "You don't have to be Jewish to love Levy's real Jewish Rye."
Likewise in NYC, we don't have to be Irish to love corned beef and cabbage, catch the spirit, and participate in St. Patrick's Day festivities.
Every important politician, it seems, is Irish that day, marching--with high visibility-- in the popular  St. Patrick's Day Parade.
To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 28, 2015>
January 20th's NY Times, Science Section's "Hard Cases" column, Too Close to a Patient for Comfort, makes the case, based on AMA guidelines and other sources, that objectivity in medical care may be compromised by doctor-friends.
"Medical care supplied by a relative -- or an old friend, or a trusted employee -- just seems so logical.
After all, who could care for you more?
But that is just the problem..."  Two thoughts, a dilemma..and 1 good tip at the end.
To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 25, 2015>
Veterans' Important Aid and Attendance InformationReblogged from AgingCare.comHelp!
Aging Parents has presented information for--and about--Veteran's since a June 2010 post.
This reblogged post by John Roberts, Esq.
offers new and important information, in hopes that as many Vets and their widows as possible have this information in a timely manner, read the proposed regulations, and submit comments in the link provided at the end of the article-- if they feel the need.
To view entire post please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 24, 2015>
Rid Aging Parents' Winter Woes and Doldrums  Entertaining elders and aging parents in winter can be problematical.
Too many storms and chilling temperatures lead to winter doldrums, especially in parts of the US this year.
Understandably many older people hesitate to go out, except for necessities.
Cabin fever.
Grumpy dispositions.
Inertia.
The antidote: Think spring and take elders to a flower show.
Leave the cold and the reality of leafless trees and non-blooming plants and enter the sunshiny atmosphere and beauty of spring.
Image: Philadelphia Flower Show ~2013              (click to enlarge) To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 14, 2015>
HAPPY VALENTINE'S DAY  What is it that's so endearing about seeing an old couple holding hands, walking arm in arm, smiling at each other in that certain way?Is it what each one of us hopes for when we hit the old age mark?
My oldest guest, my friend's mother in her 90's shared: "I may be old, but Inside I feel like I did when I was an 18-year-old (pause) with all the same desires too."
To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 11, 2015>
 Three Scrumptious Treats: Middle Eastern, French, American  Mouth-watering Middle Eastern Pastries from Michigan   Many older people, seniors and aging parents, appreciate smaller portions and small tasty bites--shunning the big meals and all-you-can-eat excesses of their younger years.
Metabolisms change, dietary issues develop but let's face it, a sweet treat now and then lifts spirits.
If not on Valentine's Day----when?
To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 3, 2015>
   "Lost Dog"--can anyone resist?
Most popular (Courtesy Budweiser)  What could be better entertainment for aging and elderly parents than watching some of these commercials, if they didn't see the game?Sunday, February 1, 2015.
Super Bowl XLIX....
If spirits need lifting, watching that little puppy plus a few other Super Bowl 2015 ads, could be just what the doctor ordered.
To view entire post and watch selected commercials that will entertain and engage elders we care about, visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 1, 2015>
...with 4 simple words Tough talks.
Dreaded discussions.
Difficult conversations-often about issues involving two generations' differing realities.
Parents are good drivers.(?)
Parents' homes are still suitable.(?)
Parents' hygiene is fine.(?)
The list goes on.
To help parents age well, what is the reality?
Do they need our help?
or Do we need their help?
To view entire post please go to my other site l      
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 25, 2015>
Help!
Aging Parents was honored in late December-selected as one of Good Therapy's 2014 "Top 10 Websites for Aging," they write:As a self-proclaimed "serious, well-educated cheerleader for helping parents age well," this blog shares information and insight about issues that affect geriatric parents and their adult children.
Susan, the sole author, often tackles everyday issues that seem banal but can become problematic in old age, like swallowing medication or planning dinner events.
She writes with humor and candor, and cites input from professionals as well as her "senior" advisers.As we end the first month of 2015, much of the US is cold and elders understandably remain indoors.
If we don't live with them and are conscientious, we visit as often as possible.
An issue that's definitely "banal" ("ordinary or commonplace") is the high temperatures at which elders set their thermostats to stay warm.
It's problematic when it's suffocatingly warm in their home for us, but not for them.
To view entire post please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 22, 2015>
Some doctors don't "take' Medicare.
They have chosen to be excluded from the Medicare Program participation.
Nevertheless, if your parents have Medicare coverage, they are entitled to reimbursement from Medicare regardless of doctor's Medicare affiliation.
It just entails a bit more work from you/your parents..Helping parents age well clearly includes their healthcare.
And no doubt a large percentage of parents have Medicare coverage, using doctors who "take' Medicare and do the paperwork so Medicare can reimburse.
And this works pretty well.
To view entire post please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 16, 2015>
"Time takes all but memories," an inscription on a sundial that inspired a memorable sermon.
That inspired my post last year, with suggestions for helping aging parents to do things they'll remember.
Following up on that inscription and that post- To read entire post, please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 11, 2015>
 The right "tools" makes everything easier--for any situation  actually.
(Learned this in a "Home Repair" course; found it a truism.)
It's not rocket science that an easy-to-use, dependable walker is the  right "tool" to continue mobility and an active life.But do we realize that the first walker purchased may not be the ultimate walker?
Here's why--1.
We often select quickly (possibly the one used in rehab).2.
We often select the least expensive.3.
Subsequent factors, like balance and aging parent stability may lead to buying a sturdier walker.
To view entire post please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 7, 2015>
 The Right Cane Because of R's strong desire to remain in her home of over 65 years and live independently, alone--she may have put more thought into cane selection than many.
The cane she eventually purchased, she first used in rehab.
While she used many canes in rehab, this one felt best to her, because of its handle, which is broad.
Her palm rests on it, instead of fingers wrapping the usual more rounded handle.
Thus, it felt like added support.
She was told when she left rehab 4 years ago how important it is that the cane is fit properly by someone knowledgeable.
She's convinced that's why some people who, don't stand up straight and walk properly with their cane, have problems.
As parents age, inevitable problems arise.
Loss of almost all vision in R's left eye and macular degeneration in her other eye are her current concerns.
Mobility isn't one of them thanks to her cane and a walker (next post).
To view entire post, please visit my other site.                   
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 5, 2015>
Four years ago this month R left the rehab center after spending 4 months there.
Today, at 101, R is completely mobile.
She now walks with a cane when she goes out (which she didn't do before she broke her femur).
She uses her cane at home when she "feels unsure." What has changed since R's surgery?
To view entire post please go to my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 1, 2015>
Confusion About Medications Outdated Medications Dependable medication reminders An at-the-ready lest of prescription and non-prescription drugs: Let's hope our parents don't have the first two--  and do have the last two.
We make New Year's Resolutions when we're young.
Getting our life in order is a priority for many.
I'm guessing if we check with our elders, there aren't so many resolutions made--and if they're made they don't include anything related to their medications.
Yet taking medications as directed, when directed, would be a worthy--and possibly life-saving--resolution to help parents age well in 2015.
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 20, 2014>
Some aging parents are lifted by the excitement and activities of Christmas; for others there's overstimulation and stress.
And at some point, for all aging parents, there's a slowing down.
Do we notice this?
Can/should we do something?Indeed, the holidays can be tricky for some and need to be simplified, especially for those with Alzheimer's.
Then there are aging parents and elders we care about, who can't do what they used to because of aging-related conditions.
I ran the preceding sentence by our Sr. Advisor, Dr.
Bud, MD, (psychiatrist) asking for his thoughts.
To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, December 18, 2014>
Another Christmas gift idea: A gift we give ourselves or others who are caregivers (and don't already own it)--Passages in Caregiving.
As readers know, Help!
Aging Parents takes no ads and rarely reviews books.
That said, we're always on the lookout for gifts to help parents--and elders we care about--age well.
Books that help us as caregivers, translate into helping those we care about and care for.
To read entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 9, 2014>
They say "It's what's inside that counts."
No argument here.
That said, doesn't anything that looks great on the outside raise our spirits...and those of our elders?
Two gift-giving holidays are fast-approaching.
I think of the value of extra nicely wrapped gifts-where the initial fun is seeing them, followed by the joy of discovering what's inside.
To view entire post please go to my other site.
http://helpparentsagewell.com/2014/12/06/aging-parents-gifts-that-look-great/ 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 30, 2014>
Doesn't a small gift a day sound like a way to continually brighten up the holiday season for older people?
Whether living at home or in a care center, don't we all love a gift!
Here's my list of 20+ easily purchased, inexpensive gifts, keeping in mind:  Most older people  -don't like clutter  -don't want what they don't need  -appreciate gifts they use up  Please go to my other site to view entire post.   
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 22, 2014>
                                        You may have received the Thanksgiving forward below--or not...
In any case, I share it.
Supposedly it's from a grandmother.
Disregarding its length and the possibility that a non-grandmother created it, it conveys an important message--irreverently highlighting elders' values--exaggerating basic, irksome things younger people, whether adult children or beloved grandchildren, do.
Even if we don't get caught up in the specifics or the humor, the need for elders to have control and respect comes through loud and clear.
I've become even more keenly aware recently.
For Senior Advisor R, now 101, life has become hard work.
There may be no other 101-year-old in this country who still lives alone in her own home of 65+ years, getting regular help only 4 hours a week from a cleaning person.
Admittedly neighbors on both sides and across the street discretely watch out for her 24/7.
I've written about this previously.
They treasure her.
To view entire blog and read Grandma's letter, please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 18, 2014>
Prescriptions for pills--more prevalent as people grow old.
Yet before we are old, many of us are accustomed to taking nonprescription pills.
Perhaps that's the time we learn whether swallowing pills is easy for us.
But what about aging parents and older people?
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 12, 2014>
  Make Room For the In-Laws.
"...Why space for aging parents is a hot real-estate amenity now."
"Put away the snarky in-law jokes," we read.
"For both domestic and foreign buyers, the hottest amenity in real estate these days is an in-law unit, an apartment carved out of an existing home or a stand-alone dwelling built on the homeowners' property.
While adult children get the peace of mind of having mom and dad nearby, real-estate agents say the in-law accommodations are adding value to their homes."
WSJ 11/7/14 To view entire post please go to my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 4, 2014>
Before the holidays, before the time crunch, why not make or purchase a terrarium?
Older people, especially, are enchanted by these little creations.
Nature is restorative.
Watching these manageable little gardens grow and bloom keeps everyone interested..... and that helps parents age well.
To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, October 31, 2014>
When people live alone (with a diminished social network and plenty of time to think), it's easy to dwell on problems and become depressed.
That's when my counseling training automatically kicks in-                                          Words and ListeningReally listening is a skill.
We usually hear and respond in ways that seem appropriate and there's nothing wrong with that.
But really listening can put us in the other person's head and allows us to show understanding with a simple phrase (e.g.
"it must be so hard," "it sounds very frustrating") -few words; no advice.
To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 26, 2014>
     Princesses, witches, and pirates are set to rule this Halloween.
Credit: Getty.
An active, appropriately-involved grandmother recently said: "Oh!
I won't be able to resist going to my daughter's and seeing the kids in their costumes before they go trick or treating."
She was looking forward.We can never be 100% certain when we plan ahead for older people, because stuff happens--usually more for/to them than us.
Yet we know giving older people something to look forward to lifts spirits.
Below are 8 plan-ahead, look-forward to--ideas that, at most, require transportation on  our part.
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 22, 2014>
          When I lived near this farm stand I'd take pumpkins home and decorate--not carve--them on the kitchen counter....gifts for elderly friends at Halloween.
However when we moved to the City, transporting them became a logistical challenge because cars in the City are basically an expensive nuisance.
Thus, our car is in a garage in the suburbs.
Last week I took the commuter train to the suburbs, got our car, then purchased the pumpkin, flowers etc.
without knowing where I would assemble everything.
Decorating in the car would be a last resort, as there's no electrical outlet for the glue gun.
Decision: this year's pumpkin--only one--would not require a glue gun, only the skewers to poke the holes.
I forgot it last year and ended up using a fondue fork.
It works too.
To read entire post, please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 12, 2014>
  Who doesn't enjoy Halloween decorations!
They're a treat for all ages and are becoming increasingly widespread.
Indoors and out-of-doors these decorations are so much more elaborate than the orange, carved, candle-lit pumpkins--and perhaps a black cat or witch-- sitting on the front porches of our childhood.
However..... Are aging parents and older people getting out to see them?
And--How can we make this happen?
Please go to my other site to view entire post *           *          *  
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 5, 2014>
Dr. Leonard Plaine, a highly respected, recently retired urologist at NYU Langone Medical Center, was a logical choice to double-check my last week's "Aging Dads: Incontinence Issues--Part 1" post.
He has treated men's urological issues for many decades and I especially wanted his "take."
Please go to my other site to view entire post. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 30, 2014>
....Although the high rise of incontinence is in women 75 and over, and the rise is less dramatic in men, incontinence-usually temporary (3-6 months)-is common following prostate surgery.
Also as men age the sphincter muscle that controls urine outflow can weaken due to more and more years of use.
Doctors recommend Kegel exercises for men (with varying degrees of success depending on different factors)......  To view entire post please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 25, 2014>
DYING IN AMERICA AND HONORING INDIVIDUAL PREFERENCES NEAR THE END OF LIFE, with recommendations for major changes, was issued last week (9/17/14) by THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF MEDICINE'S RESEARCH ARM, THE INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE.
It suggests an overhaul of current practice at almost every level.
To view entire post, please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 21, 2014>
     Just published: The American College of Physicians' New  Guidelines re: women's urinary incontinence, triggers thoughts:1.
An experience with Mother.2.
One of this blog's key thoughts: Is it better for parents or better for us (in this instance the caregiver)?3.
A prejudice about the word "diapers" used in conjunction with old/older people's incontinence.
.......The American College of Physicians' new guidelines for dealing with female urinary incontinence recommend special exercises--as opposed to medications--first.
Maintaining feelings of normalcy helps parents--and everyone--age well.
FYI: "Urinary incontinence (UI), the involuntary loss of urine, has a prevalence of approximately 25% in young women (aged 14 to 21 years) (1), 44% to 57% in middle-aged and postmenopausal women (aged 40 to 60 years) (2), and 75% in elderly women (aged >=75 years)" American College of Physicians To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 16, 2014>
                                             Birthday card from the staff We stick to our philosophy.
We do what aging parents want as long as it doesn't threaten life and limb and they still have, what Sr. Advisor R calls, "a good head."
R's birthday was Saturday...her 101st.
We follow the advice in last year's post: Celebrating Elders Birthdays: What They Want, Not What We Want.
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 11, 2014>
Memories are part of our being.
They allow us to momentarily recapture our youth, milestone events, surprises large and small and so much more.
If "Time Takes  All But Memories" (see August post) from elders who've lost spouses, good health, friends, family etc., can we supply happy memories for them--as well as for aging parents and the older people we care about?
5 Suggestions  Visit my other site to view entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 27, 2014>
Older People Worry About Falling  Older People Want Independence  Older People Don't Wish To Be Limited By Physical Problems I doubt anyone will dispute these assertions.
On the other hand, are we--or most older people--aware of the physical activities that help aging adults retain independence so they can continue to age well?
In 2008 the Department of Health and Human Services published Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans, the first comprehensive guidelines on physical activity ever issued by the Federal government, with a section that focuses on "Older Adults."
Tufts provided this update this week: To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 24, 2014>
Can the elderly be sustained by memories?
I came across a speech excerpted from a 1965 memorial service.
A sun-dial inscribed "Time Takes All But Memories" inspired a sermon (in part below) making me wonder: What's it like for the isolated elderly?
Do they have only memories?
"What is true for the dead, is equally true for the living.
When there is no one to think of us, no one to care for us--even though we be alive, is it not as though we are dead?
To be sure, I am not speaking of mere physical survival, for a man might breathe and eat and pump blood for 969 years like the legendary Methuselah in the Bible--but who wants to live if he has no one who loves him, no one who cares for him, no one who remembers him?
Total, perpetual endless loneliness is, I daresay, even worse than death itself."
Please go to my other site to view entire post with, of course, ideas to make life better for the isolated elderly and those who feels no one cares.  
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 16, 2014>
"Good job!"
How often do parents say this simple phrase to their children.
Good parents praise and reinforce self-worth.
No elaboration needed.
What is needed is the reminder of how easily self-esteem can be unwittingly undermined in the elderly--be it by strangers, acquaintances, or family members.Is it due to assumptions people make about older people?Is it that a well-meaning phrase, used to show affection, is actually belittling to a proud elder?Is it that an unthinking remark, in response to an elder's age-related issue, hurts?
To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 13, 2014>
Is it safe to say we're all guilty of interfering with our parents' independence at one time or another?
When we're busy--because of our other responsibilities to work, family, caregiving--it's perfectly normal to want to get it done and move on, rather than wait for an older person to do it at his--or her--slower pace.
To view entire post, please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 11, 2014>
It's easy to do things out of love and wanting to help that are not necessarily in older people's best interest.
It's easy to do what we think is right--or is the only way we know how--without realizing it isn't helpful and may, indeed be harmful.
What's at risk?
What are the options?
To view entire post, please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 7, 2014>
Again this year, US News & World Report, has published its Best Hospitals issue.
Of the 17 hospitals to make the 2014-15 Honor Roll, top honors in Geriatrics are earned by Mayo Clinic in Rochester, followed by Mt.
Sinai in New York, UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles, Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, and Massachusetts General in Boston.
Click above link for Geriatrics honor roll.
For difficult and out-of-the ordinary diagnoses and procedures the best hospitals are most likely to have the most experience, so aren't we're also talking about best doctors here?
It makes sense to have the above list, should especially worrisome health issues arise.For more "garden-variety" health issues there are many fine regional hospitals which are recognized in this issue of US News & World Report.
To view entire post and access links please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 1, 2014>
Going Through 80+ Years of Meaningful Moments     Sorting                                    Then VP Richard Nixon--campaigning                                                 and a vintage photo of boys playing marbles?
It's tedious.
Making decisions--what goes (and to whom); what stays; what we think we can sell, and what gets shredded on the (I think) first-generation shredder in my parents' home.
Tackling the many boxes' contents can feel like a newbie's climb up Mt.
Everest.
I've hated and loved every minute.
To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, June 29, 2014>
We survived day one of the 2-day estate/tag sale.
Admittedly I am very tired; am also fervently hoping to get a good night's sleep tonight.
My energy level is its best in the morning.
I'm tired at the end of a normal day-whatever "normal" is.
And today, after rummaging through countless personal items (meaning they'd mean nothing to anyone else), I'm taking my own advice and crawling into bed.
Tomorrow is another day-- estate/tag sale day at the house.
Please go to my other site to view entire post, which is very short.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 24, 2014>
There's going to be a moving/estate sale this weekend.
70+ years of things to go through and clean out.
People running the sale come tomorrow.
It feels like the locusts are going to descend and I need to take anything of value-sentimental or otherwise-to a safe place...... .........My brother had the good sense to leave town a few days ago, leaving me to go through everything by myself.
Exhausting but also a way to have an intimate kind of closure.
A cousin offered to help, but I liked sifting through things and stopping to read this or smile at that-without interruptions... To view entire post, please visit my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 18, 2014>
Regardless of who's doing the caregiving (or the illness involved), the last key thought keeps us balanced and healthy and--ideally--less stressed... thus better able to handle whatever comes our way.
Everyone seems to be in agreement on this point.
Meet UCLA's Dr. Linda Ercoli, a clinical psychologist, and Director of UCLA's Geriatric Psychology.
Her webinar offers....HELP FOR SURVIVING STRESS.
Please visit my other site to view entire post  
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 14, 2014>
                      An Unexpected Honor and the Key Thoughts The May 24th email announced: "I am happy to inform you that your blog has made Healthline's list of the Best Alzheimer's Blogs of 2014.
Healthline diligently selected each of the blogs on the list....." Neither Alzheimer's nor dementia is in my husband's or my family.
And I've never written specifically about it or any other illness in my posts.
The closest I've come to mentioning dementia is including links in the sidebar ("Of Current Interest") to articles I've reviewed (some include dementia) from highly regarded medical school publications.
So Help!
Aging Parents takes special pride in the reasoning the led to including our blog in this "Best" list of 23 Alzheimer's blogs.
Helping Parents Age Well isn't just about helping our parents.
The information and insight in these pages is useful to anyone        who anticipates living beyond midlife.
Key thoughts like "Will        these actions I'm about to undertake empower or diminish?"        and "Does the quick fix harm later goals?" inform all of blogger       Susan's writing.
Her focus on values and long-term solutions         makes for a good life-coaching guide and regular reading.Since the "Key Thoughts for Adult Children of Aging Parents" list goes back to my early posts, and many may not be aware of their publication, revisiting the list makes sense.KEY THOUGHTS* The Right Start Saves Many Problems To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 10, 2014>
Cake by Esperanza 2014 Round-up of 45 Gifts for Fathers and Grandfathers Continues.... Back in the day when men "dressed" to go out--even to a baseball game--ties were a most popular Father's Day gift.
Indeed until recently ties continued to be a very popular gift.
The more casual dress code the US has adopted, makes me wonder about the future of ties...they aren't listed under "Accessories/Clothing" in part 1.
Yet for traditionalists, this Father's Day Cake complete with tie could be a creative answer for those who bake and like using marzipan.
Can anything can top making this cake as a loving tribute to a great Dad or Granddad?
For those who don't bake, my round-up continues.....Hearing: Hearing loss is a problem for older people and for those who communicate with them.
Assistive listening systems: products for TV watchers who need very high volume to hear well (while others don't).
Click the preceding link then scroll down to "Assistive Listening Systems" if you wish to educate yourself.
Amplified Telephones =better conversation for all.
This link provides a quick education as does the "Amplified Telephones" section of this U. of Calif at San Francisco Medical Center site.
To view entire post and access links please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 9, 2014>
2014 Round-up of 45 Gifts for Fathers and Grandfathers     Father's Day sleeveless sweater vest cake made by Esperanza            More gifts ideas for aging fathers and grandfathers--than I think a man could possibly want--have filled my posts over the last three years.
I've reread them, remembering the time and outside-the-box thinking that went into compiling the list.
8 categories, arranged alphabetically: "Accessories and Clothing" to "Vision.
"I've updated the original list and added to it.
It's long now.
I'll post in 2 parts so it's not overwhelming.
Hoping that your shopping is made easier and that the aging men in your life will have smiles on their faces when they open their gifts.
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 26, 2014>
  MEMORIAL DAY--MONDAY MAY 26, 2014 "Can we look into the hearts of old people?"
I asked in yesterday's post.
And last night, courtesy of NBC news, we saw and we heard.
A conversation with WWII veteran, Ed Gordon, now 90, who landed on Omaha Beach--one of the 150,000 Allied troops who took part in the Normandy Invasion on D Day--and "NBC colleague," Viet Nam veteran and Medal of Honor recipient, Col. Jack Jacobs--gives us an intimate "look."
I've isolated the link below for easy forwarding.
http://video.msnbc.msn.com/nightly-news/55260333
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 25, 2014>
  MEMORIAL DAY--MONDAY MAY 26, 2014 Can we look into the hearts of old people?
Things change.
Values change--both at a rapid rate.
It's part of today's world and we deal with it.
Sometimes it's easy to overlook the impact on our elders as we continue with our busy lives.
A one-minute video, with no spoken words, looks into the heart of a WWII veteran.
In the old days the name, Memorial Day, and date, May 30th, were carved in stone-- or so I thought when I was a girl.
I didn't know that before WWII Memorial Day had been called "Decoration Day," although I remember hearing that name.
The 1968 Uniform Monday Holiday Act changed "carved-in-stone" dates to days that would allow for a 3-day holiday weekend and took effect in 1971.We're accustomed to the 3-day weekends.
We take the opportunity to get away for a short vacation.
Some think Memorial Day is the start of summer.
We have family picnics.
There are fewer parades.
In our hearts and minds we respect the holiday, see the flags flying, know "Fleet Week" has arrived in New York.
But, unless we have family in the military, I doubt we can tap into what Memorial Day means to those who have served--especially those who served over a half century ago, still possessing the memories (told and untold) and the pride.While that which old people hold dear is disappearing faster and faster, it remains in their hearts.... To view entire post please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 23, 2014>
  Does being in a hospital bed qualify Medicare-eligible seniors as In-Patient?
For some time now, we've been hearing about Medicare-eligible seniors who've been given "Under Observation" status when admitted to hospitals--for what any intelligent person would assume should be "In-Patient" status.
"Under Observation" status is not "In-Patient."
If parents need to enter a skilled nursing facility or a nursing home after the required three days of hospitalization, Medicare will not pay and the family will be required to pay all of the bills, including the hospital costs, if hospital status was "Under Observation.
"We might also assume that those in a bed in a hospital are automatically considered "In-Patients."
Not true.
To read entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 13, 2014>
"I'm late, I'm late........"* TIME MATTERS--POKEY PARENTS(Joints stiffen.
Less agility.
More wisdom.
More Caution.Does slowing down begin earlier than we realize?)
Think about stiff joints and arthritis...and vision.
Then think about buttons, zippers, or--for women--the clasp on a necklace or fastening a bra (which some do from the front before turning it around to the back), or the physical act of slipping something over one's head.
How much additional time does it take to differentiate dark blue from black?
(Try sorting those socks.)
Have you ever seen an older man wearing one black sock and one dark blue sock?
To view entire post, please go to my other site   
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 11, 2014>
                                                 "What's the Goal?"
I've written about how important it is to ask ourselves this question in several past posts.
It's true for caregiving.
It's true for handling problems in life.
And I'm taking my own advice.
Thankfully it has become second nature when things seem impossible and/or overwhelming.
Asking "What's the Goal?"
untangles some of the minutiae, helps focus, and makes the goal stand out.
We then need only figure out how to attain it.
To view entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 16, 2014>
Holidays provide endless opportunities to help parents age well.
Taking elders out for a change of scenery is one--especially for those who are basically housebound, mobility challenged, or don't venture forth except for essentials like doctors' appointments.
It's uplifting, muscles are exercised, and it can be exciting--like those field trips we went on in grade school.
To view entire blog, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 9, 2014>
For satisfaction in later life--to age well, research has told us that maintaining physical and mental health, volunteering and having connections with others are necessary.One researcher, Dr. Monika Ardelt, an associate sociology professor at the University of Florida in Gainesville, wondered could people in poor health, those who'd suffered losses, and those "whose social roles were diminished"--age successfully or would they just have to "give up."
Her recent findings:"Wisdom is the ace in the hole that can help even severely impaired people find meaning, contentment and acceptance in later life."
To view entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 1, 2014>
 "No one likes to see a lessening of themself" Julia Normal age-related changes cause a lessening: ie.
vision, hearing, energy, flexibility, strength-- not a literal taking away.
However, as we try to help parents age well and we become aware of the "lessening," (which parents may have tried to cover up--think driving), doesn't it make sense to look for ways to support or replace so elders can continue to "do?"
This probably means empower or substitute.But how?
While we know one size doesn't fit all, we can do some of the leg-work and perhaps partner in the final "doing."
To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 25, 2014>
Letting Go-Preparing The Last Income Tax at 100 This is the last time Sr. Advisor R is doing her income tax preparation for the accountants.
Yes, she's 100.
Yes, she still lives independently, alone in her home of over 60 years.
Yes, she has a blood clot that has greatly diminished vision in one eye.
Yes, she uses not 1, but 2 magnifying glasses when the normal print is too small.
And yes, all of this is pretty amazing, but it has been extremely arduous and overly time-consuming this winter and has been a source of stress.
That said, R has worked at simplifying everything in her life as age has slowed her down.
Giving up income tax preparation  (still using legal pad and adding machine), is a big concession.
As Julia, another independent elder referred to in past posts, said many years ago "No one likes to see a lessening of themself." To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 15, 2014>
We've written about aging women's hair care, hair loss, hair styles, and hair enhancement quoting tricologists, MD's and other hair experts and stylists (see RELATED below).
As Time Goes By has a series of very good posts (below).
In September Grandparents.com offered "7 Secrets to the Haircut that Will Make You Look Younger."  To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 6, 2014>
 "If my 90-year-old father is released from the hospital  could this technology monitor his progress at home?" I know  you can guess the answer; you just didn't know the seeming simplicity of getting the information from a smart phone, using apps and sensors.
In the You Tube TV clip you'll see a modified iPhone produce a cardiogram for a patient; a tiny senor used for glucose monitoring; and understand how the iPhone can become a "lab on a chip" (for  doing blood tests etc.).
Wireless technology can predict a heart attack about 2 weeks before it happens by monitoring one's blood.While this sounds like-and is- wonderful news medically, it can also be wonderful news, in a different way, for us-the caregivers, chauffeurs and devoted adult children because of the time it saves.
For example,  I'm wondering how many, like me, are on fast forward and can get a bit cranky waiting for aging parents to get ready to go to a doctor's appointment, not to mention time spent waiting in a waiting room for the doctor.
And  then think of the time it takes to get test results and lab reports.
Wireless medicine  changes that.
Please go to my other site to view entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, February 27, 2014>
Sr. Advisor R has been called "amazing" for years by so many 40-60-year-olds, who call her "terrific" and "timeless."
Past posts have underscored their respect for her wisdom and admiration for her ways of handling things.
She's both an advisor to this bog, and my m-i-l. And currently she is facing another challenge: a big round spot blocking vision in one eye--macular degeneration.
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 24, 2014>
2013 Philadelphia Flower Show Feel-Good Outings  Aging parents needn't be couch potatoes to feel depression or cabin fever due to a harsh winter.
It's easy fo anyone!
Cold, an absence of sunshne, and slippery sidwalks can make anyone feel cranky, if not depressed.
"Trapped in the house," "Looking at the four walls."
I've heard these expressions from elders.
And "cranky" may not go away easily.
Negatives like a bad health diagnosis, another friend's problem, the world's problems, not to mention loss of a friend, pet, or part of a support system (dentist, hair dresser) add to being miserable.
Please go to my other site to view entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 21, 2014>
Few challenges require establishing priorities, setting boundaries, testing the loyalty and dealing with allegiances the way in-laws with health issues can.
When our spouse's aging parents require more attention and care, in-laws--whether loved or not--are thrust into the family's dynamics.
Obviously this changes the balance.
The way we handle it is key.
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, February 13, 2014>
I loved this Valentine idea when Monique told me she thought of it for her mother a few years ago; and I introduced it on this blog last year....While Monique's 89-year-old mother lives in France, I think this works for anyone we love, in any circumstance--whether being sent far away or delivered close to home or to a care center or nursing home.
With permission, I share once again and personally use it for the first time.
To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 5, 2014>
                      Photo: Anheuser-Busch What could be better entertainment for aging and elderly parents  than watching some of these ads?
Please visit my other site to view entire post and watch selected videos of ads
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 3, 2014>
   NO GIRLS ALLOWED sign in front of boy's clubhouse--decades before Woman's Lib.
The young girl is now a well-recognized low vision specialist.
How many of us have had the bittersweet experience of being back on the street where we lived, in the bedroom of our growing up, years after our parents have died?
Our street was a micro world--kids about the same age who, when very young, built summer huts of tall weeds on a vacant lot near the end of the street.
Before adolescence our early "architecture" morphed into the boys'-built clubhouse in a neighbor's back yard.
It had the requisite "NO GIRLS ALLOWED" sign.
Please go to my other site to view entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 26, 2014>
If we understand what's required of us and are pretty good at organizing, we can thoughtfully work out and adopt a routine--a balance--that integrates with the other parts of our life.But what do we do when, as often happens over time, part of the equation changes?
If it requires more of us, do we give more?
Then do we give less to the remaining part of our life?Simply put: we learned in high school math, how to balance an equation.
Can we make that happen in our life?Being caregivers for aging parents requires adjustments on our part as their needs change.
When our responsibilities mount and more time is required, ideally we make commensurate changes in other parts of our life to consciously balance things.
To view entire post, please go to my other site  
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 19, 2014>
Mother was already hospitalized when I raced (flew) cross-country, rented a car, and broke every speed limit to be at her hospital bedside.
Half hour later she was in a coma.
Something in me (and I think in Dad) wanted her to be able to die at home.
But it was Memorial Day weekend and we learned, upon asking, that getting any kind of caregiver etc.
help immediately was out of the question.
To view entire post please go to my other site:
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 16, 2014>
  Wouldn't You Think THANK YOU, like I LOVE YOU Would Never Go Out of Style?
Good manners were instilled in our elders.
People wrote thank you notes for gifts...period.
While good manners are much more relaxed these days, wouldn't we think "Thank You" like "I Love You" should never go out of style?
That said, many elders who have sent gifts (as opposed to personally giving them) are left wondering...Did the gift arrive?
Did they address it wrong?
Did the store slip up?
Instead of gift-giving bringing joy, there's doubt, anxiety and additional effort if they feel the need to track the gift.
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 14, 2014>
 Sr. Advisor D Meet D, our newest Sr. Advisor.
A former colleague and long-time friend, D has offered us aging insights for several years.
Below she writes about a recent experience at her long-time "hair salon," aka "hairdresser's," "beauty salon."
Regardless of name, it's a place women go ostensibly to look better.
But it's much more than that for many older women.
It's socialization, getting out of the house, therapy of sorts.
Indeed it's one of the few patterns of younger days that can easily continue well into old age.
Where else can an older person relax and count on being listened to, being pampered, being treated well?
The hair salon's supportive atmosphere lends itself to sharing thoughts and feelings.
D takes it from here-- To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 10, 2014>
I've decided to update and combine my September 3, 2010 checklist with several others, get rid of redundancies, and produce the most comprehensive list I can.To begin--I give this no numerical # because having this information will save time and frustration as parents age--Know where legal documents are kept: power of attorney, health care proxy, living will and will.
(Also know that hospitals, for example, accept faxes of powers of attorney and health care proxies so it's wise to have copies handy in case of a health  emergency.)
Sr. Advisor RHW, Esq.
points out parents, as well as their lawyer, should have these documents, should you not be able to find them.He further explains......
Please visit my other site to view entire post
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, January 3, 2014>
I usually publish my blog Tuesday night.
Yet I was immersed in readying for, and cleaning up after, a New Year's Eve party and completely forgot.
While multitasking has been a constant in the lives of many of us with old/older parents, the following from Mayo Clinic is a quick, timely read for me and quite possibly for you.
"Stop multitasking an learn how to focus" (from the Adult Health category on Mayo Clinic's website), speaks to me with 4 timely suggestions.
Indeed, they are doable and 1(or all 4) could be considered a New Year's resolution.
Depending on our age, we may or may not have memory concerns about ourselves.
On the other hand, when older parents start forgetting, an alarm bell is often triggered.
To view entire post, please go to my other site: 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 25, 2013>
(c) ElaineLeBerg It's The Haa, Haa--py--est Time of The Year The words and melody from the radio fill my car as I drive to the post office to mail the holiday cards.
We have snow, it looks like a winter wonderland; and kids, amid shrieks of laughter and merriment, are sledding down our shared driveway on anything they can find that's large enough to sit on.
Sun is  shining, snow balls are flying, and I'm certain school vacation is adding to this happiest of times.
And then my counseling background kicks in and I remember that holidays aren't always the happiest of times for people.
So I decide to check in with a few older people and see how they're doing.
As a counselor, I'm trained to ask objective questions--not leading questions that will give me the answer I want (or think I want).
That said, let me share my findings.
To view entire post please go to my other site: http://wp.me/pGfkw-3Li 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 16, 2013>
Juggling everything on a normal day, with over-busy, over-programmed schedules, is hard enough at this time of year--whether we're children of aging parents, caregivers or Sandwich Generation.
Do we feel like we have ADD?
DISORGANIZATION, FRAZZLED NERVES--worsened by the unexpected glitch.
And can't we count on that!
There's an old saying "I'm dancing as fast as I can."
Taking that a step further: when we try to dance faster than we can, don't we wear out or lose our balance?
So how do we stay balanced?
9 Strategies that work  To view entire post please visit my other site: 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, December 5, 2013>
 Growing Older Doesn't Necessarily Mean Growing OldWe may question this assumption if we're in the midst of caring for aging parents with health issues.
On the other hand, the results of research, published last month in the Journals of Gerontology, may be heartening for us if our parents are still relatively healthy and independent--and also heartening as we think about our years ahead.
To view the rest of this post please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 1, 2013>
Understanding Medicare and Medicare Advantage Plans Can Help Parents Age Well                                                Open enrollment ends Dec. 7I was perusing the November 22 online Huff Post 50 topics, when "25 Things You Absolutely Positively Must Do Before You Die" captured my attention.
But that was only momentary.
Since I didn't plan to die right away, another article won out: "7 Tips to Help You Pick The Best Medicare Advantage Plan,".This informative, clearly explained article, written by journalist, Bob Rosenblatt, is also on his blog, Help With Aging, where he writes: "I developed the Los Angeles Times' first beat on aging, and wrote a column for the Times' health section on these issues... To view entire post, please visit my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 27, 2013>
I think everyone would agree: having a sense of purpose is essential to feeling good about life.
The big question: How do we instill a sense of purpose in aging parents who no longer have it?
Do remember, those who never had it will no doubt never get it--People Change, Not Much.
To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 23, 2013>
 Pack the car and the kids--To Grandmother's House We Go--perhaps.
But what if there are 3 or 4 or more living grandmothers with husbands?
What about siblings and siblings-in-law?
To view the rest of this post, please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 20, 2013>
 Thanksgiving Leftovers Go Home With Thanksgiving/Chanukah just a over a week away, I'm thinking about our dinner, older family members, their eating habits, and what special contributions I can make.
At age 97 and 98 Sr. Advisor, R, previously shared thoughts and advice on my posts about nutritious food older people like, can prepare easily and quickly, and where and how she buys it.
(Links below) Now--at age 100--she shares her philosophy as it relates to life and food, and reiterates her quick, easy, no-mess, healthy food preparation that has helped her age well.
To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 13, 2013>
HOW DO WE CELEBRATE WHEN CHANUKAH AND THANKSGIVING SHARE                                                           THE DATE?
ARE BLACK FRIDAY SALES BEING ONE-UPPED BY THANKSGIVING                                                             SALES?
ARE AGING PARENTS AND GRANDPARENTS FLEXIBLE?
Please visit my other site to read entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, November 7, 2013>
                           Gifts We Can Be Certain Elders WantMEMORY TEST: Have your aging parents or grandparents--or great-uncles or aunts-- ever mentioned, off-handedly or in conjunction with other thoughts, something they need, want or would love to have?
And you file it in your memory as a gift idea for later on?I've flunked that.
Perhaps I'm not alone.
Sunday I was reading posts in my archives and unearthed something I'd forgotten.
to view entire post, please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 6, 2013>
                                Do Parents Need Nurturing?Jane Brody's September 16, 2013 column, "When Parents Need Nurturing," is a short read.
Many topics she touches on are amplified in past Help!
Aging Parents posts.
For example,  she mentions parental demands, feelings of obligation, sharing of responsibilities with or without sibling help, and the emotional component.
And includes suggestions.
If we weren't proactive in the sensible ways Ms. Brody has suggested; if our relationship with our parents causes us undue stress, and we feel like we can't go on because we're "living and giving beyond our limits,".............. please visit my other site to view entire post
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 30, 2013>
 Holidays provide opportunities we can take advantage of-- to jump-start aging parents and add some joy to their lives.
.....I remember my parents coming back to visit in late October one year.
They were in their '70's.
Halloween night stands out, with the excitement that each ring of the doorbell created for these active seniors.
With that in mind, I share ideas for involving aging parents in the Halloween fun.
Invite aging parents to your home to marvel at the trick-or-treaters' costumes.Dad loved answering the door bell's ring-then seeing the little kids in costume.
Their high pitched' "trick or treat" elicited his compliments about their scary look, great costume etc.
They beamed at the compliments as they took their candy.
Dad beamed back.
Mother, in the background, seemed happy to replenish the candy supply.
She too had a big smile on her face as she watched these excited little kids having such a good time.
To view entire post and enjoy the Halloween photos, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 27, 2013>
Sr. Advisor R had a problem.
The crown on her tooth broke.
She didn't want to sit in a dental chair and experience an "ordeal," as she put it, which I'm sure it is for a woman who's 100.
While R makes every effort to take good care of herself, deciding about options (extract tooth, make new crown using new technology, or using traditional technology) was causing stress.
I discussed Sr. Advisor R with my dentist, Gary Markovits, DDS.
He's highly experienced, skilled, comes from a dental family, and is sensitive to old people's needs (his wife's parents are in their 80's).
I wanted to know if old/older patients need special consideration."For our senior patient population," he says "it's important to-- To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 24, 2013>
Much time, thought, and energy--under the best of circumstances--go into planning end-of-life directives.
In the olden days this no doubt consisted primarily of a will.
Today, in our more complex society, additional important aspects of estate planning impact not only who is beneficiary of our worldly goods after death, but--on earth-- our very life itself.
We never know when something serious could happen that sends us to the hospital; and I doubt any of us keep advance directives in our purses, wallets, or smartphones.
Thus, this New Old Age column (which instructs us to give copies to our primary care doctor, "health care decision-makers" and keep copies for ourselves) is worth the quick read.
To read entire post, please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 21, 2013>
.............My elderly friend loved them and remembered they would last, no doubt until Halloween.
Her caregiver kept telling me how much he loved helping and spent a while taking pictures with his cell phone.
Bottom line: It's always rewarding to do something that makes an older person happy.
This was a win, win, win-- for my elderly friend, her caregiver, and me.
To view entire post, please visit my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 16, 2013>
....a leafy houseplant While giving aging parents and older people an easy-care house plant isn't Horticulture Therapy, precisely as it would be offered in a care facility, some of the same benefits apply.... To view entire post, please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 10, 2013>
October.
Days shorten.
Get colder.
Leaves fall.
We spend more time indoors, less time with nature.Isn't it a perfect time to give an easy-to-care-for plant to an older person?
Even more perfect if doing so helps raise the spirits of those we care about-those living alone, in assisted living or care facilities, even those with no "green thumb."Here's a short list of plants that can take neglect and still perform.
Indeed they ask nothing more than regular watering and filtered sun or low light.
To begin--flowering house plants.
to view entire post, please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 9, 2013>
Not all shoe styles with Velcro are suitable for old people.
Yet some styles fulfill a need.
Think: one foot wider than the other; arthritic or old fingers that make tying laces and manipulating buckles difficult.
As people age, feet can widen and/or develop bunions, hammer toes or other problems that cause one foot to fit better in another size--or width--shoe.
This is where Velcro comes to the rescue.
To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 3, 2013>
Sr. Advisor R, during the week between her 100th birthday and her party the next weekend, couldn't help giving me more advice when she proclaimed: "VELCRO" in much the same way as I remember "PLASTICS" in the 1960's classic movie, "The Graduate.
"I didn't realize the implications Velcro has for looking good and feeling better, but R made me aware.
To view entire post, please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 2, 2013>
We learn from people's--and our--mistakes.
It's especially important to be up on the learning curve, and avoid mistakes, if we're in a hospital.
A sobering chain of events calls attention to: 1. a slogan2.
advice, gained from Dr.Susan Love's (surgeon and prominent breast cancer prevention advocate) hospital experience, about the importance of family.3.
information from Jon La Pook, MD (NewYork-Presbyterian/Columbia U.
Medical Center and Chief Medical Correspondent for CBS News) about how to get optimal hospital care.
To view entire post please visit my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 26, 2013>
On July 8th I wrote about a new game, Road Tour, that researchers find restores cognitive processing speed and improves field of vision.
Peripheral vision evidently shrinks as people age and affects safe driving.
Here are details, plus a video, from the UK's Daily Mail on-line: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2317955/New-game-make-brain-years-younger-hours-effects-lasting-year.Three months later (9/4/13) several publications inform us that the scientific magazine, Nature, is publishing findings that cognitive scientists say: "are a significant development in understanding how to strengthen old brains."
(NY Times 9/4/13) plus a snippet: "Cognitive scientists have found that a simple game that forced players to juggle two different tasks, helped players improve the short-term memory and long-term focus of older adults.
Researchers said those as old as  80 began to show neurological patterns of people in their 20s."
(NY Times 9/9/13.)
To view entire post please visit my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, September 25, 2013>
 Dad valued his teeth; took good care of them.
You can imagine my surprise decades later when Dad's tooth broke while he was sitting in his favorite chair watching TV.
No theatrics--it just broke.
He was in his 90's, wasn't eating anything at the time.
The tooth just--unexpectedly--"broke off.
"This event replayed itself recently.
It happened to another old person.
She also took good care of her teeth, was a conscientious dentist-goer and had all her own teeth in her 90's.....
Please visit my other site to view entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, September 23, 2013>
 It may all boil down to pride; staying home is safe.
No one likes to feel diminished, whether it's unintentional or not.
Yet going someplace where interaction with others is the norm can pose a threat to older people's pride and self-esteem when they have certain aging issues.
I think it's safe to say many--if not all-- older people begin to recognize what octogenarian Julia calls "a lessening of oneself," adding "it's not pleasant.
"When others no longer pay attention to them and/or or older people don't want others to discover their "lessening," thoughts of being with others away from home can be emotionally troubling.
Three issues (you may think of more) that can cause this: To view entire post, please visit my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 8, 2013>
Is "assisted living" a euphemism for warehousing aging parents in an attractive place where we think they'll be well taken care of?
The PBS documentary "Life and Death in Assisted Living" is, I certainly hope, not the norm.
But what is the norm (and it's not the fault or responsibility of the administrators of the assisted living facility) may be the often inattentiveness on the part of adult children once their parents are in assisted living.
To view entire post please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 26, 2013>
If we're immersed in health issues with aging parents, the tips could seem frivolous.
Nevertheless, these tips about eyelashes and brows, foot changes, finger nails and vitamin E........give us a "heads up" for what's ahead and offer some practical help so aging women continue to age well.
Please go to my other site to read complete post.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 25, 2013>
Can we keep the promises we make to our parents?
To view entire post, please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 20, 2013>
8 Instructive things to keep in mind when considering assisted living, home health care, and family caregiving..... ....to read entire post please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 19, 2013>
The dilemma when health issues increase  Most caring children--far-away-living or not-- have undoubtedly thought about the time when living alone will become problematical for their parents.... To view entire post, please link to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 11, 2013>
CBS News presented a segment about the "Best Hospitals" issue.
It's the video's specific information, imparted by Dr. Jon Pook in the interview, that I found most instructive.
Dr. Pook is a doctor at at NY-Presbyterian/Columbia U.
Medical Center and chief medical correspondent for CBS news.He discusses measures to insure getting optimal hospital care.
For example, he stresses the importance of communication needing to be "a good hand-off" between the patient's regular doctor and the hospital's doctor or the hospitalist, comparing it to the passing of the baton in a relay.
He calls attention to basic, but critical, things........ To  view the rest of this post please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 9, 2013>
The US News & World Report "Best Hospitals" issue is always an excellent resource.
I've copied from the website and added links and my text, with the goal of helping parents age well.
For example, click this link http://health.usnews.com/best-hospitals to research a particular medical specialty and find the best hospitals with that specialty.
For example, Mt.
Sinai, which had the #1 Geriatrics rating in 2010 and 2011, was #2 in 2012, and is #4 for 2013-14.
The top 10 Geriatrics Departments:  To view entire post please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 7, 2013>
A gray-haired woman, bent over her walker, was moving somewhat awkwardly towards our group and the private bus that was taking us to the Gare de Lyon in Paris.
We would then board the TJV for a barge trip in Burgundy.
Although 99-year-old, Sr. Advisor R has said "DON'T ASSUME" countless times, I did assume this woman wasn't traveling on our barge.
WRONG!Initially I didn't know her age, nor that she was accompanied by a sister--11 years younger.
While I do know that affect influences our first impression of people and while I've been trained, as a counselor, to be objective and nonjudgmental, barge travel isn't luxury liner travel.
It involves a degree of mobility--at minimum navigating steps to get to the bedrooms and bathrooms below deck, and often walking ladder-like steps with railings and a gangplank to get from the barge to often  unmanicured terrain--all this before reaching the point of interest.In  six days I watched a 79-year-old...... To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 5, 2013>
My mother didn't want a birthday celebration; in fact it just occurred to me: I can't ever remember there being a birthday party for her.
I think she didn't want a "fuss." I wonder if she didn't want to discuss her age.
(She looked younger than she was-died 2 weeks before her 89th birthday.)
In any event, we all complied.
Being a far-away-living child, I made a card, sent a gift, phoned-we were all happy with that and I never regretted it.Dad, on the other hand, enjoyed celebrating so we chose destination birthday celebrations......
Being mindful of the 9 points listed in the last post would, I trust, have averted the surprise party and denture disaster.
And isn't a surprise guest an excellent alternative for those who would hate a surprise party?As we continue our commitment to help parents age well, birthdays give us many options--only limited by our good sense--for adding stimulation and joy to our elders' lives.
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 2, 2013>
If we're fortunate enough to have very old parents and grandparents who are still relatively healthy, chances are we become very involved planning their birthday celebrations.Sr.
Advisor R will be 100 in  September.
We are planning her party, again in her home town.
There have been various kinds of parties for her over the years-taking into consideration health issues and energy.
Indeed many variables that we might not think about become important for elders' celebrations.Considerations1.
Comfort level---Do they like large (20+) or smaller gatherings?---Do they have the energy for the large or the smaller or neither?---Do they mind or like surprise parties?2.
Practical considerations---Do they wear dentures?---Can they travel?---How large is the party budget?---Are invites telephoned, emailed, or snail-mailed?---Gifts or not?---What about family members who don't get along?Other Factors    Please go to my other site to view the rest of this post
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 31, 2013>
Ninety-two-year-old Edie, an actual person in my unpublished book advised, "Don't dramatize small failures," after explaining:  "People have weaknesses, but they also have strengths so don't zero in on the weakness--like forgetfulness--it's only one piece.
When it happens in younger people, they say they're only 'senior moments.'  They don't make a big deal about it.
"A senior moment?
A potential time bomb?
Initially we may wonder how to distinguish between the two?
Then we wonder how to bring up the subject.
To view the rest of this post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 28, 2013>
                                Difficult Discussions: 9 Tips for SuccessDifficult discussions were a normal part of  my counseling work: teacher-student dialogs to settle misunderstandings, parent-teacher conversations to clarify accusations or actions, constructive conversations with teenagers who made bad choices, parents who were angry at the school, their kids--you name it.Early on I learned through experience (and I guess some techniques I learned at TC) how to prepare for uncomfortable discussions, achieve my goals, and maintain a good relationship.
I also learned from a favorite professor, that when dealing with family, you'll probably forget what you learned and act on your instincts.
No!
Don't stop here.
To view entire post please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, July 18, 2013>
Of course the answer is "yes" and "no."
But looking at a few examples can give up a "heads-up" so we aren't premature in our actions.
To view entire post, please go to my other site 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 15, 2013>
We're reading more about research studies leading to "games" involving "Brain Training."
We see and hear the advertisements for ways to improve memory, alertness etc.....One of the latest games to come out of the research is a video game, Road Tour.
I can't recommend--or not recommend--it; but it's an interesting addition to games for older people.
Its focus is worth knowing about.
It involves vision, specifically expanding one's field of vision, which evidently tends to shrink as we age.
The positive outcome of this game is that it could keep older people driving longer.
Please go to my other site to read entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 13, 2013>
TRAVEL: Any vacation that requires little more than a short car ride to a familiar place involves more organization, thought and energy than it did pre-911 in the US.
Understandably this can be daunting to old and older travelers when airport navigation and unfamiliar territory are involved, not to mention stress for anyone accompanying an older individual.Sr.
Advisor R, who--at age 98-- flew alone cross-country to visit us last year, just said she had one more trip in her (she will be 100 in September); so I asked if she'd share her thoughts about travel and how she does it.
To begin we need to keep in mind:1.
"Energy level changes.
My renewed energy doesn't renew as it used to...maybe because I don't sleep as well.
You have to think about everything--it isn't that one doesn't want to travel but you're not as confident when you're old.
That's what age is.
For old people it's not the world we knew....we don't know what to depend on."
Please go to my other site to view entire post. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 9, 2013>
With 6 Important Questions to Ask Ourselves at End of This Post                                        It Takes A Village   (The following, taken from my manuscript, is copyrighted, nonfiction except for the names, and may not be reproduced without permission) A social worker who worked with older adults in New York, reminds us "It takes a village to raise a child," then points out that at the other end of the life cycle "It takes a village to keep the grandparent in the village."  Meet Bob.
For him the village provided both care management and relationships.Bob had no family to watch out for him, yet he continued to live in the small suburban New York studio apartment he and his wife, Ruth, had shared until the day of his death at age 84.He was 72 and retired on a small pension when Ruth died.
He had the beginnings of macular degeneration, was an unrepentant smoker, and had only a few friends.
But they supported him in his time of need by inviting him to dinner, giving him the key to their home so he could play their piano, and having him help them by walking their dogs when they were at work.
In all, five unrelated people, decades younger than Bob, looked out for him.In the twelve years following Ruth's death, Bob's macular degeneration worsened; at 80 he quit driving.
One dog owner wrote his checks, which he signed, so his bills got paid.
Another friend took him marketing until walking became a problem, whereupon she did his grocery shopping.
Two years before his death he could walk only a short distance before wheezing, coughing, and labored breathing made walking difficult.
Going to the doctor became difficult.
At a certain point he refused to go for anything other than a flu shot.Responding to a suggestion of assisted living, Bob let it be known that he had no intention of going into one of "those" places, where he'd have half the space and wouldn't be allowed to smoke.
He didn't need good vision to navigate his small apartment--or to light his cigarette for that matter.
His home was his anchor, his safe haven.When his unopened mail overflowed the table, and food began to mold in the refrigerator, and the apartment became a mess, another of Bob's younger friends called the town's social services for the aged.
Bob was interviewed and charmed the social worker with his fine mind and love of music and poetry.The result: Disaster Masters came to clean up--and out--Bob's apartment, with Bob sitting there directing what stayed and what went.
Meals on Wheels began bringing food.
A home-aide came for an hour, three mornings a week at 8am, to do laundry and straighten up before going to her other jobs.
The social worker arranged for three volunteers to come weekly for socializing.
One, a woman, loved poetry and read poems to Bob every Thursday.With the necessities taken care of and additional daily monitoring by two neighbors on his floor, Bob was able to remain in his apartment until the morning he died peacefully in his bed at age 84.Bob had no family members to care for him.
He liked living alone.
Contrast his experience with that of Ellie's grandmother, in Eastern Canada, who was surrounded by well-meaning family members.A Flower Pulled up by the Roots     "My grandmother was a farmer in the early days.
Later she and my grandfather lived in a home with a big piece of property where Grandma raised flowers and vegetables.
She had such pride in her garden and was in it every day she could be.
When Grandfather died, her children wanted her to move to a smaller place and not have the burden of a large home and grounds and they talked to her about it--again and again and again.
"In time, Grandma said she would move.
I felt this was the wrong thing for her to do, since the garden meant so much to her, and with 28 relatives, I was going to organize it so she'd have someone visiting each day, could keep her independence, and could be monitored.
"Finally, one day she said: 'Put the house up for sale.'  She then moved in with my mother--and died a year later."According to the wise octogenarian (quoted previously in the manuscript), we also need to realize that "As you age, you lose the energy to fight... and give in."  This may be the reason Ellie's's widowed grandmother finally agreed to move in with one of her children.While the "village" enabled Bob to live out life on his terms without family involvement, the loving adult children and grandchildren who surrounded Ellie's grandmother exerted influence that produced a different outcome.
With usually only one chance to do it right, asking ourselves the following questions can serve as guidelines for better decision-making: When making decisions or promises, what is the priority: our needs or our parents' needs?
Are our decisions aimed at maintaining parents' independence until it's no longer safe for them to remain as they are?
Are we mindful of not prematurely undermining any of the essential ingredients for aging well--self-esteem, independence, socialization, having fun (activities)?
Do we have all the information we need to make--or help our parents to make--the best informed decisions?
Is it possible that old emotions from our growing-up days creep into and influence our decision-making?
If unresolved relationship issues remain, does it make sense to seek the counsel of others when making important decisions?
The above is copyrighted and may not be reproduced without the author's permission.
*         *        * While most of us are no doubt excellent caregivers or reliable mainstays for our aging parents, there can be siblings as well as other family members who think they know what's best.
It's not only frustrating, but can lead to outcomes that are worse for parents than if they had no children.
Since we usually have only one chance to do it right, the guidelines for decision-making will hopefully come in handy as we invest ourselves in helping parents age well.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 19, 2013>
                   Looking good=feeling better... and has to help parents age well Realizing there's no proven and approved, relatively simple way to regrow hair, the search goes on.
If FDA-approved Latisse (it thickens eyelashes), can be made to do the same for the hair on our head, there will be a predictable stampede to the drug stores.
As of now, however, we continue to wait and search for a miracle product.As Help!
Aging Parents continues its mission to help aging parents (and us) feel good about our hair: today's topic: topical products: Rogaine, MoniMay, and Toppik.
To view entire post please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, June 17, 2013>
Ever feel like you're wearing 2 hats?
One gaining information for yourself and one gaining information to help parents age well?
From boomers to aging parents (mothers) the information in these first 3 links will be useful.
Professionals explain probably all there is for a layperson to know about hair.
Please visit my other site to view entire post
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 5, 2013>
In some ways we want to be like our mothers.
In other ways we learn what not to do.
Early on I resolved not to be a slave to my hair or a hairdresser.
In a previous post I mentioned fussing with hair seemed to be in women's DNA, beginning as preteens.
After college I stopped adding a beer rinse for extra volume; stopped doing my own hair.
As a working educator with a paycheck, I had my hair done once a week (just like my mother did).
However, once living in NY for graduate school and subsequent counseling positions, I found regular hair appointments disruptive and the upkeep too time-consuming.
(And every time I went west to visit my parents, mother was still fussing with her hair before going out.... To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 4, 2013>
Our Uncle Lou may have been one of the longest Parkinson's survivors.
He was a talented Hollywood writer whose creative genes worked overtime.
A true genius, he was witty, always with a new idea, and a great way of presenting things-until the end of his life at age 78.
He lived with Parkinson's for 27 years, always looking for and hoping for some kind of relief, if not complete cure.
We know-too many of us first-hand-what happens as the disease progresses.
We cling to hope that advances are made.
So I share the information below, with hopes that UCLA's procedure will make it possible to bring this much needed advance to millions.
Join Dr. Pouratian for a live-streaming webinar on June 11th to learn about the latest advances in Deep Brain Stimulation for Parkinson's Disease and Tremors.
Register for the webinar at my other site.
To view this post in its entirety, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 26, 2013>
On Memorial Day I think about my Uncle Max.
He was a WWII Veteran.
He was with the Signal Corps in the Battle of the Bulge and what I know about his service during the war was a result of fuzzy memories when I was young and family conversations when I was older.Uncle Max was a mild-mannered, sweet man, would give the "shirt off his back" to anyone.
It was hard for me to envision him fighting.
I don't think one fights in the Signal Corps unless necessary, but I do think one has to be very brave.
If he was very brave it wasn't apparent when he finally came back home.I say "finally came back home" because Uncle Max came home a first time.
I was very young and asleep, but I remember someone woke me up and carried me downstairs to see him when he came into the house that night.
I remember there was a flurry of activity and a lot of conversation earlier that day, preceding his coming home; but I was too young to know why.
I only knew something big was happening.
Please go to my other site to view entire post
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 23, 2013>
         Why do some aging parents make the effort, while others don't?
We see older people with the will.
They no doubt aren't as famous as James Levine.
Yet they have that something within that pushes them forward and won't let them quit.
Sr. Advisor R is one.I think back to Sr. Advisor R's rehab after breaking her 97-year-old hip (femur) and her observations of the daily small group physical therapy sessions she participated in.
She was the oldest there, yet she observed some younger people found the physical therapy very difficult and didn't even try.
(We were told, she tried encouraging them.
)That said, why do some do, while others don't make the effort?
Does it go back to People Change, Not Much?
If they didn't make the effort when they were younger, can they can't be expected to change when they're older?
To view entire post, please visit my other site:
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 19, 2013>
                                                                           Look good, feel better... ...has been one of the consistent themes to help parents age well.
Isn't it uplifting to look in the mirror and like what we see?
We all know that a bad hair day--or just plain bad hair--makes no one look good or feel very good, so naturally this article grabbed my attention.
Visit my other site to view entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 16, 2013>
Are we aware of our parents' insecurities or do they cleverly hide them?
Why do they do this?
Because of: pride, our youth-oriented culture, denial, valuing independence What are the insecurities?Concern about meeting responsibilities, looking old,acting old, forgetting, having an accident, losing mobility, losing sight, losing control and probably most of all, fear that their children will make them move.
Please visit my other site to view the rest of this post
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 14, 2013>
Regardless of feelings and specific age, even boomers (and of course old people) develop insecurities they neither had nor thought about while younger.
At a certain age many make efforts to cover up insecurities so as not to seem "old."
To view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 10, 2013>
Is now is the time to expand older parents' capabilities a bit and provide then with more fun and opportunities by gifting them with a simple-lish smartphone?
That said, my caution holds--give this gift only if you think they'd be agreeable.
That could involve a trial run.
For example, going to lunch with them and including a stop at the ATT,  Apple or whatever store to check out the smartphones below (without making a commitment) makes sense.
To view entire post, please go to my other site: http://wp.me/pGfkw-36f 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, April 28, 2013>
"I don' want anything that takes up space or I have to dust.
I just want my children to be together and get along."
74-year-old grandmother  Please go to my other site to view entire post and pictures.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 24, 2013>
There's an old saying: "you get what you pay for." This old adage may be impossible to "buy into" in these economic times.
Many are out of work or underemployed.
Others are living on fixed incomes that provide interest rates barely above 0%.
So it may pay to know about the free programs available.
Please visit my other site to view the rest of this post.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 17, 2013>
                                    R's 9 Original Sayings:                               Words of Wisdom About LifeOriginal sayings must be in Sr. Advisor R's DNA.
One of her mother's sayings, "Do the best you can, angels can do no more," has appeared in previous posts.
Wisdom...based on many year's of living.
R's mother died in her early 90's.
R will be 100 in September.
Please go to my other site to view entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, April 11, 2013>
"EACH YEAR, half-a-million injuries occur in the United States because of medication errors," according to a 2009 U Magazine (UCLA health) article.
We live in an imperfect world.
The older we get the more we're aware.
With a better understanding of "best practices" are we better equipped to help hospitalized aging parents avoid accidental bad things because we know what to look for and thus, know what questions to ask?
How can we know and ask pertinent questions if we're clueless about it in the first place?The following excerpted information from U Magazine's 2009 article, "Do No Harm," illuminates measures the UCLA hospital system began implementing to reduce the potential for accidental "bad things" (my words for the overarching concept).
Having this knowledge helps us know what to look for.
Hopefully our hospitals have implemented some of these measures so we and our aging parents can take advantage--now 4 years later.
Please visit my other site to view entire post. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, April 8, 2013>
The New Old Age column from a 10/16/12 NY Times recently surfaced.
Its subject: family caregivers and the fact that they do many nursing tasks formerly assigned to professionals.Speaking of "nursing tasks," the Visiting Nurse Service of New York ran some-I think-wonderful full-page ads.
For example, a photo of a nice-looking, elderly gentleman with kind eyes and white hair.
The ad reads:He's 95, Takes 10 medications, Needs help bathing, walking and dressing,And feels deeply grateful.He's "grateful to the physician who helped him get all the care he needs to stay out of a nursing home, with Medicaid Managed Long Term Care (MLTC) from VNSNY." This is followed by text enumerating the Medicaid-covered home care and long-term care services, basically nurse care management and home health aide services.Back to the New Old Age column.
It enumerates the tasks family members now do (eg.
give injections, manage feeding tubes, manage complicated medications), with "little training and no backup." Visit my other site to view the entire post
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 2, 2013>
Heartening research: News comes from a small study--indeed one of the first--to assess the effects a computerized-memory training program has on memory.
Published in UCLA's Summer 2013 U Magazine, courtesy UCLA Health and the David Geffen School of Medicine.....
Please visit my other site to view entire post. 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 30, 2013>
Getting Out of the Dumps:                 Don't Assume, The Incentive, "Normal" Depression, The Results 1.
Remembering one of R's wise sayings "Don't assume" is something we need to keep in mind.
We would have turned down James's invitation if we had assumed R-at 99 1/2- wouldn't go to a large gathering, especially when it followed another night out.
(R avoided large gatherings "like the plague"-beginning several years ago- because, she said, they took too much of her energy.)2.
Our efforts to "jump-start" old people are great and should continue; but their feeling of gaining, not losing, ground has an even greater psychological "jump-start-effect on old people.
(See observation below.)
To view entire post please go to my other site  
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 25, 2013>
Another holiday (actually 2 holidays).
Another opportunity in our efforts to help older parents and grandparents age well.Passover begins at sundown on March 25 and lasts until nightfall on April 2.
Since Easter always occurs during Passover, the Judeo-Christian parts of the world celebrate miracles during the same time period every spring.Many believe that the The Last Supper was a Passover Sedar.
I'd never questioned it but was wondering "which night of Passover was The Last Supper" so I google that phrase.
First google offering: "Was Jesus' Last Supper a Sedar?".........
These holidays celebrate miracles.
Granted we can't make miracles, yet sometimes it can feel like a miracle when we can add enrichment in a special way...a way that gives aging parents and elders a lift and perhaps a lasting memory.
Happy Passover * Happy EasterTo view entire post, please go to my other site.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 20, 2013>
Having a small bathroom and small shower made this "update" simple, but "expensive--around $1,000"--according to R. Moving to assisted or independent living would have been quite expensive.
Much more money for much less space.
Plus, she'd be leaving a home and neighbors that have been--and are--an important part of her life.As long as R's mind continues to be good, she will call the shots (and enjoy her refurbished shower).
To do otherwise would be to undermine all that she has done to remain independent.
As we try to help parents age well, we stop and ask ourselves: Is it easier/better for us or easier or better for them?"
To view entire post please go to my other site www://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 17, 2013>
          To age well, connections to others are very important.
We know that, yet we can feel like we're talked                           to death; and that's not good.PROBLEM: Phoning an aging parent who talks and talks and talks can seem like punishment.This may not matter as much, when we have nothing better to do with our time.
Yet when adult children are frazzled and stressed or they're just plain tired, there's help.
To view the rest of this post, please visit my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 10, 2013>
"Perhaps the most common misconception about palliative care is that it is synonymous with hospice care; in fact, though it plays a prominent role in a dying patient's life, it is also offered in conjunction with life-prolonging and potentially curative treatments for patients with cancer, heart failure and other chronic and life-threatening conditions." UCLA Medical Magazine 2009                               Aging as well as possible, as long as possible To view entire post please go to my other site
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 6, 2013>
The gigantic clock face, as the hands reached the hour, disappeared and delighted spectators as it was replaced by a showcase of Britain's most popular musicians-beginning with the Beatles singing  ALL YOU NEED IS LOVE.
I see parents pushing children in strollers, and wonder why more adult children can't/don't make that same effort for their aging parents and grandparents.
Then I see a gentleman, in his mid-80's he said.
I told him of my observation.
He responded: "If you wonder why I bring my wife in a wheel chair...Because I love her." To view entire post please visit my other site. 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, March 4, 2013>
                    How Do We Make the Best Choice?We make many choices throughout our lives, granted some much more important than others.
But how do we know we're making a really good choice-or the best choice-when major health matters are involved?
Please view entire post on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2013/03/03/aging-parents-making-major-decisions-think-doctors-life-savingchanging-surgery/
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, February 28, 2013>
While I've never been an alarmist, I think having the information below is just plain "smart."
While one could use the word "proactive," it's not a word I particularly like-- but it's also clearly applicable.
Today we're much more informed about our medical treatment, which sometimes involves more explanations from doctors than we can digest.
This is a good reason to accompany aging parents to their doctor appointments if they'll agree to it.
4 ears and 2 brains should be better than half that number, especially when people grow old.
Let's look at how this relates to supporting hospitalized aging parents~ Please go to my other site to view entire post
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 24, 2013>
 .....While great progress has been  made in stroke prevention and rehabilitation, and Mother and her brother suffered milder strokes than their mother, they both were stroke victims while being monitored by their doctors and on medication.
The bottom line: Click the link above.
It's never too late for a refresher...for myself and everyone-who is at risk, knows someone at risk, or whose goal is to help parents age well.
Please view my other site to see entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 20, 2013>
In response to a reader's request-Do you know anything about senior friendly phones at home (base station and hand held)?
My husband is almost blind, and we have no cell phone reception here, it's a rural area, only our landline- I pass on this information.While the specific information below is for California Residents, the Low Vision Services Coordinator, Low Vision Clinic, University of California at Berkeley, who I have known for decades, says "most states have similar programs." Please visit my other site to view entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 13, 2013>
...."The Pope is quitting.
I want to quit," she continued.
(Obviously she had already read the paper.)
She went on saying something like "I understand his not having the energy for all the responsibilities.
"You know I've been feeling this way for some time now.
I'm tired.
I've done everything.
Helped everyone I can help; given all I can give--financially not that much, but every bit counts-- to help people and the charities I know do good right here in town; and I just don't have the energy for the responsibilities any  more."
Please visit my other site to view entire blog.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 10, 2013>
Several years ago a friend gave me a printed article with some nursing home gift guidance from  http://www.aracontent.com.
(no longer on their current site).
I wouldn't have kept it this long if I didn't think it worthwhile.
And since Valentine's Day is only days away, I've used the article's gift topics for structure, added many gift suggestions, included photos and all of the specific plant suggestions.
Please visit my other site to view the full post.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 6, 2013>
When it comes to helping parents age well, my friend Monique is one of the best daughters I know.
While its contents can be priceless, turning Monique's Valentine idea into a reality takes as little or as much time as we want to spend.
It's handmade (a card or small booklet) with as many pages as we wish.
What's inside, is the key.
To view entire post, please visit my other site: http://wp.me/pGfkw-2Pt 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 30, 2013>
It's always a joy to receive a Valentine, whether young or old...but especially for the old.
Having ideas for Valentines--or Valentine gifts-- ahead of time clearly reduces the pressure.
Of course, executing the idea eliminates the pressure completely--and can be lots of fun.
I'm checking with friends for ideas.
Here's idea #1 with thanks to far-away-living daughter, Monique, who's doing this for her mother in France.
From the heart.
So original.
To view entire post please visit my other site: http://wp.me/pGfkw-2OV 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 23, 2013>
A SILLY QUESTION:  ARE GRANDCHILDREN GOOD MEDICINE?
He sat next to me on the plane today.
Was late boarding.
Turns out he was standby, had missed 2 earlier flights--needed to get back to the east coast after coming briefly and unexpectedly to see his very ill grandmother in Nevada.
Last Wednesday afternoon an unexpected phone call with information that his grandmother had a cancer diagnosis, and the probability of a short time to live, catapulted him to action.
He talked about how much he loved his grandmother; about his getting on the plane to Nevada the next morning--standby; he just had to come, he said.
To view entire post please go to my other site at Wordpress: http://wp.me/pGfkw-2Nx 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 19, 2013>
As posted last Saturday,  Sr. Advisor R had a nonhealing leg sore.
When I mentioned R's sore in answer to "How's R?"
the 90-year-old questioner quickly pulled up one leg of her slacks about 5" to show me her ankles and the bruises above them.
Said they'd been there for ages, she had a sore that took three months to heal, and she only wears slacks now.
To view entire post, please go to my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2013/01/19/aging-what-you-need-to-know-about-the-fragility-of-old-skin-and-hospital-wound-care-centers/
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, January 17, 2013>
The flu worries me.
I rarely say "worries."
I usually say "concerns."
I think that's because unless I feel I have very little control over something I use "concern."
In the case of this year's flu--or several strains of flu--the worry emotion was triggered yesterday.I needed to take Sr. Advisor R (99) to a hospital's Wound Care Center to have her leg checked.
(Indeed I planned to use information gained there for today's blog until I got there...it will appear in this Saturday's post.)
As I anticipated sitting in the waiting area for a time with many others, my mind flashed: FLU GERMS.
I looked for seats furthest from others.
This isn't like me.
To view entire post and photos, please go to my other site on Wordpress.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 13, 2013>
For some, a bottle of alcohol may feel/seem like their best friend.
For them, a "little drink" doesn't suffice.One of those people was someone I knew professionally, probably in his late 60's.
How to help him was a dilemma and a challenge.
On one occasion when I was at work, I received a phone call from the police station in a neighboring village.
He was there, charged with DUI.
Could I come and pick him up?
Please visit my other site to view the entire post: http://wp.me/pGfkw-2KD
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 6, 2013>
A good friend calls with thanks for our New Year's Eve Dinner Party.
Being together was great.
We talk about our plans for the day and rest of the week.
My friend is playing bridge today and Friday.
"Are you playing with your friend's elderly mother today?"
I ask.
"Not today, but I'll be playing with them Friday.
You know, her mother's 90, doesn't hear well--really doesn't hear well and a lot of our group doesn't want to play with her because of that-- but she's a good bridge player.I was appreciative of anything that made my mother happy (she died at 94) and if I can do this for Marcia, I'm happy to.
Playing bridge gives Marcia's mother something to look forward to and gets her out of her house....." to view the rest of this post please visit my other site at WordPress.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 10, 2012>
More gifts ideas for aging fathers and grandfathers--than I think a man could possibly want--filled my May 2011 Father's Day gifts posts: 7 categories, arranged alphabetically, from "Accessories and Clothing" to "Vision."
I reread them, remembering the time and outside-the-box thinking that went into compiling the list.Not needing to reinvent the wheel, I've updated the list and a added a bit.
I'll post it in 2 parts so it's not overwhelming and conclude Saturday.
Hoping that your shopping is made easier and that the aging men in your life will have smiles on their faces as they open their presents.1.
Accessories and Clothing: --Cane (measured correctly) or walking stick--Hat (to shade a bald/potentially balding head)--Sport shirt.
(Dad liked long sleeve ones to protect his arms from skin cancer--a definite concern as he aged.)
--Sleeveless cardigan sweater vest (not over the head).
Easier to get off and on if buttons aren't a problem.
Older people run cold.
Dad wore it at home.
It also looked good under a jacket when he went out.
(This style is hard to find...know someone who knits?)
--An easy-to-use umbrella collapesable--opens and closes with the push of a button.
(Totes makes a good one.)
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/12/04/2012-holiday-gifts-for-aging-fathers-and-grandfathers-1-updated/ to view the remainder of this post which includes-- 2.
Computers:  3.
Entertainment:  4.
Health/Hygiene:
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 1, 2012>
On Thursday MORE magazine's computer Weekly Update featured an article with results from MORE's survey* asking women 60+ to share feelings about:Current Marriage/Romantic RelationshipParentingReligious/Spiritual SatisfactionWork There were 1002 respondents-the oldest was 90+.
We can assume these women-although on the older, old, and old, old side of life-read MORE magazine and therefore, are connected to what's going on and are mentally capable.
I think it's safe to say we can also assume the results are applicable to some or many of our aging mothers and may be applicable to some or many of us- depending on our current age.
To view the rest of this post please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/12/01/aging-parents-women-60-90-share-feelings-in-survey-how-this-impacts-us/ 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 25, 2012>
Fashionable, Appropriate, Clothing and Accessories: 6 Excellent Sites There's a never-worn St. John knit hanging in my closet.
Normally a very pricey label, it was so inexpensive (a "buy" you can find in NY).
I couldn't resist getting it for my mother years ago--her size, her color, two piece.
But she never wore it.
Why?
At age 83, she tactfully told me that she didn't wear short sleeves because of flabby arms.
Who knew?Something to think about when selecting clothing: older women's particular wants and needs, as well as challenges.
Can can they button and unbutton easily?
What about hooks and eyes?
clasps to necklaces?
things that zip, button in back etc.
etc.
Do they want to downplay/hide certain parts of their body?Senior advisor R, 99, uses catalogs...and always looks well-put-together.
Check out her favorite catalogs and their URLs.
If you want to entertain your mother, while getting an idea of what she likes, check them out together.
(In counseling we call the latter "a hidden agenda.")
To view this entire post please visit my other site:http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/11/24/holiday-gifts-for-aging-mothers-1-2012 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 18, 2012>
Our Thanksgiving celebration, like that of many, brings together family members and one or two very close friends and their families.
We span generations.
This year the youngest is 5 months old and  R is 99.
R has never missed our Thanksgiving gatherings be they in the East or in the West.
But year before last--on September 30th--she broke her hip.
Attending Thanksgiving dinner that year was questionable.
Doctor's orders were no weight bearing on leg with femur fracture for 90 days....and she was in a rehab center.
There were times leading up to Thanksgiving when R didn't think she could make it; but in her heart of hearts she wanted to come.
The rehab center people said if she wanted to come, we all would be trained, keeping in mind she could only put weight on her good leg.
Here's how:.......
Since there are several days until Thanksgiving, R's experience may be useful right now.
The percentage of older people who can expect to fall and sustain a broken hip is always high, so remembering R's experience could be important in the future.
To view entire post, please visit my other site: http://wp.me/pGfkw-2AW   or http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/11/18/mobility-challenged-aging-parents-from-rehab-center-to-home-for-thanksgiving-at-97/
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 6, 2012>
I want to share three true stories this election night....about old people and elections.
Whether it's the way we're "wired' or it's acquired, let's face it-old people who are engaged age better than those who aren't.
To view this entire post, please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/11/06/aging-parents-and-politics/ 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, November 4, 2012>
 Amid pictures of younger people wading through thigh-high waters, ruined homes, scattered belongings, heavy objects upended and strewn everywhere, another sobering scene: an elderly man, who had been trapped alone in his flooded home, now strapped to equipment that facilitated his being evacuated by rescuers to higher ground.
Was he unaware?
without working portable radio, cell phone or TV?
physically unable to leave?
Or could he just not bear to leave his home?
The TV anchor reports a neighbor phoned to get him help.
Evidently no family came to his aid.
Looking out for our own aging family members isn't enough, it seems.
It clearly wouldn't have been for this man.
To view entire blog link to:   http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/11/03/hurricane-sandys-aftermath-nyc-1029-112-is-it-optimism-or-denial-or-stark-reality-that-motivates-us
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 28, 2012>
Halloween decorations are becoming as widespread as the colorful trappings associated with the December holiday season.
They're very different than the orange, carved, candle-lit pumpkins-and perhaps a black cat or witch- sitting on the front porches of our childhood.
Isn't this a perfect time to take older people out for a great change of scenery?
Aging plays so many unexpected tricks on older people.
Isn't is great when we can easily give them a treat!............
Please visit my other site:http://helpparentsagewell.com          or specifically for this post: http://wp.me/pGfkw-2v6  to view complete post and photos.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 3, 2012>
Do We Inadvertently Pull?
Do We Make It Look Graceful?
When Mother was alive-after her stroke which did not affect mobility but did affect balance and confidence-it was important to me that she maintain her dignity when she depended on me for confidence to walk in public.
Her fragile, osteoporosis-riden bones added to the problem.
I've seen so many older people whose children were strong and well-meaning; yet the elders looked awkward-often off-balance when they walked together (Who knows how they felt.)
For a way of walking with older people that instills confidence, while giving them the opportunity to walk further and feel (and look) normal, please click my other site on WordPress: http://wp.me/pGfkw-2rI
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 30, 2012>
Helping Aging Parents  How Often Do We Wonder If We Can Go On?
While trying to help parents age well we often find ourselves overworked, unappreciated, and physically exhausted.
Sometimes it feels like we're in a hole that's too deep to climb out of.
We question our efforts; we wonder if it's worth it.The statistics and information in Tuesday's NY Times Science Section http://newoldage.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/09/21/the-high-cost-of-out-of-pocket-expenses/?ref=health should, at the least, make caregiver children realize that what they do out of love, caring, or duty has great value.
Please visit my other site at WordPress.com to view complete post: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/09/29/aging-parents-aging-discouraged-caregiver-children
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 20, 2012>
                                                             Vision Being able to see-and watch.
What pleasure!
Accompanied by hearing, touch, smell, and taste, vision completes the 5 senses.
How do we decide on gifts that lift the spirits and delight the eye?
The first step is to know what constitutes "visual delights" for aging parents, whether they are healthy and independent and able to come and go at will or are among the frail and isolated elderly, many of whom look mostly at TV and "the four walls." Then think about-Gift Ideas and please go to my other site on WordPress to continue reading this post: http://wp.me/pGfkw-2pk  
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 9, 2012>
The 5 Senses: Apple Cider, Autumn Leaves, Crackling Fires,                                                   Pumpkin Pies Baking, and a Hug                                                                       aka                                               Taste, Sight, Hearing, Smell, TouchIf it seems like I'm rushing autumn, blame it on the school calendar we used to live by.
I don't know how old I was before I realized the day after Labor Day was not the end of summer.Trying to be prepared, I'm thinking of creative ideas to raise older people's spirits in autumn.
Realizing the importance of the 5 senses, I'm wondering if we can energize and lift aging parents' spirits-indeed any older person's spirits-by bringing gifts or arranging activities that incorporate at least 1 of the 5 senses.
I'm guessing you're getting the idea.
to view entire post, visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/09/02/autumn-ideas-t...n-the-5-senses/ 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 6, 2012>
My brother's very good friend, age 75, has cancer.
A biopsy taken today may not be back for 3-5 days, but scans show 2 highly suspicious tumors.
He's in the VA hospital.
Should he come to NYC where the experts are--to Sloan-Kettering?
Can I recommend someone?
While I do know someone who "lives" the medical field and does thorough research, added information before action is needed.
I'm also aware that the sister whom I've never met and I assume is in her 70's, is already caregiver for 2 sisters.
One, 82, is confined to a wheel chair; the other has major health issues.
The caregiver sister has been the sole caregiver for several years with a little help from her 75-year-old brother.
Since all the siblings live together, it's probable that she will soon have additional caregiving responsibilities because of her brother.
I offer to phone her.
The sister was appreciative, basically clueless about support.
Visiting nurse services?
She'd never heard of them.
Social services?
Her mobility-challenged sister was receiving physical therapy each week--had been for at least a year--but she didn't know who arranged it and knew nothing about social services.
This caring, giving woman has been caregiving in a vacuum.
To view the remainder of this post, please go to: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/08/28/caregiving-cancer-computer-and-convention-come-together-tonight
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, August 31, 2012>
                                    Aging Parents Set in Their Ways "Older people get set in their ways," Dad told me that when I was a preteen.
I don't think I understood anything but the obvious.
I'm much older now; fortunately well-educated.
Wiser.
Due to many factors, I get it-with all its nuances....I think.
There's something about attaining a certain age that makes some oldish people who still "have a good head on their shoulders" (perhaps more than "some") exhibit problematic behavior.
They become set in their ways-feeling some or all of the following: they're entitled, they've earned the right to....
1....do nothing they don't want to do 2....forget trying to be nice 3....have the courage of their conviction (right or wrong) 4....say whatever comes to mind without regard to its impact 5....expect more of us than is reasonable 6....change their mind on a whim (Feel free to add to the list...and read the remainder of this post on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/08/26/aging-parents-and-arguments-who-wins
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 22, 2012>
Regardless of current relationships, families' histories are rooted in their common past.
It's a powerful commonality emotionally, in a good way.
Or at least it was for us, as six cousins-ages 50's to late 80's-gathered for lunch and photo-sharing.
A far-away living child, I hadn't seen some cousins and 2nd cousins in years.
Our parents/grandparents are gone now.
They were the American story.
Five surviving children of immigrant parents are pictured above (the eldest, born in England, is missing).
When we came across this labeled photo, the feelings generated were indescribable.
The girl born in S. Africa; the boy to her right born in Canada as the family made its way to the United States.
Dad (left) and his younger brother (front) born in the USA.
We sifted through the photos and albums we brought, looking back a century-amazed to see our current selves in some of the faces.
Some of us had only seen our grandmother with gray hair.
We looked hard at her photo, into a youthful face that I, for one, would not have recognized had our older cousins not confirmed who it was.
Visit my other site to view rest of post: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/08/21/generations-share-photos-and-family-history
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 19, 2012>
 Photos connect us- to each other, to our families, to our heritage, to our gene-pool.
They remind us of our younger selves.
They rekindle the ties and feelings we have for those who've gone before us....grandparents, parents, aunts, uncles, those we held dear and those we hold dear.
Indeed, we may have inherited some of their features, some of their traits.
On the other hand, some in the photo album are unnamed.
We wonder who they are.
These feelings enveloped me the other day as I began cleaning out my parents' home of 60+ years.
They were accompanied by feelings of frustration as I struggled to recognize people in photos that lacked both name and date.
Then it dawned on me....... .....to view entire post please go to my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/08/18/aging-parents http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/08/18/aging-parent-family-photos-link-generations
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 12, 2012>
On one occasion my niece was dancing around like little girls do when Mrs. M. (age 100) rose from her chair, grabbed my niece's little hands and started dancing with her-that is until she began to lose her balance.
Only by the grace of God did a male friend, standing near, steady Mrs. M. and help her sit down.
Mrs. M's remark, while showing a bit of embarrassment, was something like "Watching her I forgot my age and felt like a girl again." To view entire post go to:http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/08/11/help-aging-par...dren-priceless/ 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 8, 2012>
What did I learn?
Planning ahead for emergency situations is just plain sensible.
When stress is high it's comforting to know we don't have to worry about certain things and we do have some control over others.
When coming a distance, having someone who cares and shares our concerns there to meet us is welcoming and supportive.
And keeping essential information at hand makes communication with professionals more effective and efficient.
Last but not least, when the unexpected happens and we can't do it alone, I NEED YOUR HELP are important words to remember.
I also learned we have good friends who we had to suddenly abandon in Italy.
They survived and so has our friendship.
To view this post in its entirety, please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/08/08/aging-parents-...from-yesterday/ 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 7, 2012>
August: last chance for vacations.
Dilemma: Vacation or "Ify" Aging Parents?
When  parents' health is "ify," do we risk going?
If they're going to miss us, do we risk going?
If our replacement isn't as skilled, knowledgeable, or caring as we, do we risk going?
To read complete post please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/08/07/aging-parents-...vacation-plans/  t
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 4, 2012>
60 once seemed old.
No longer!
Truthfully, 50 once seemed old.
So how can we go wrong having this information, using it for ourselves and for our mothers, if they're willing to risk trying a new hairstyle?
Actually the styles shown for 60-year-olds could be the updated look (check out Helen Mirren) of your mother's current hairstyle.
Look good, feel better--looking good feeling better--helps parents age well.
To see entire post please go to my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 28, 2012>
It's July.
US News & World Report comes out with its "Best Hospitals" issue http://health.usnews.com/best-hospitals/rankings once again.
Topping the list with the most specialties ranking #1 in the country: Massachusetts General in Boston.
It replaces Johns Hopkins in Baltimore which becomes #2.
In the Geriatrics specialty category Johns Hopkins replaces Mt.
Sinai in NY as #1.
Mt.
Sinai becomes #2.
Please go to my other site:http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/07/24/best-hospitals-2012-2013-us-news-world-reports/ to view the rest of this post.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 5, 2012>
The flight back to NY will soon take off.
Cell phones are active.
One last conversation before we're told to turn off all electronic devices-"anything with an on-off button," says the flight attendant.
"I love you" seems a popular ending to the conversations.
I'm thinking younger people use that expression a lot....sometimes so often that it seems to me its meaning is diluted, and I wonder how much it really means.In the olden days it meant the world.
Think Stevie Wonder and the popularity of the song whose title heads this post..... it continues: "and I mean it from the bottom of my heart." I'm sitting on the plane for over 4 hours.
My thoughts turn to aging parents, grandparents and elderly friends......Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/06/05/help-aging-parents-i-just-called-to-say-i-love-you/ to view the rest of this post.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 31, 2012>
A woman who takes pride in her independence, R is creative about making things work out for herself.
But in a strange hotel room, she wasn't so inclined.
The thermostat (room was too cold-we reset it); the TV remote (looked like hers, but the channels had different numbers necessitating reading the accompanying chart, which we explained but she said she was too tired to focus); and the telephone, which had a zillion strange buttons was challenging.
None of these would cause us more than a few moments hesitation-but they were a change and as such, presented challenges to her taken-for-granted way of living.
While confident and able to adapt to any new problems she encountered in her own home, she lacked the energy and will required to learn something temporary at this stage of life.
To view the rest of this post visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 20, 2012>
We know parents lose friends, and spouses, and sometimes a child.
Yet the totality and nature of losses is an eye-opener.
We hear from an active, obviously intelligent older person: Yesterday I traveled to the city to meet a group of art buffs who get together once a year for a tour of the galleries of new art.
We hoot at the craziness of some exhibits and press each other to understand what's going on in each installation and interactive piece.
This year, however, I could not stand and walk easily.
Fatigue overshadowed my pleasure in the art, and I knew that next year I would forgo an event that for twenty years has been one of the highlights of the fall season for me.
On my calendar is the evening wedding of a friend's granddaughter.
In the sixty years of our friendship, S and I have participated in each other's celebrations, and now I will see a grown-up Rachel in a bridal gown--Rachel, the family nonconformist, in the traditional ceremony.
I'll embrace S's friends and family members whom I've seen at previous celebrations, noting how they've aged along with me.
Can I travel for two hours to a wedding that will begin about my usual bedtime?
Easy, I tell myself, just rearrange your day to include a nap.
But at 86 I don't adjust to changes in schedule and try as I will, the nap won't happen.
Would it be foolish to go?
Yes.
Will I go?
Probably...but certainly not to a similar event next year.
Continued on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/05/19/aging-parents-endure-losses-we-might-never-realize/
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 4, 2012>
4 Fundamentals form the Foundation--Fundamental #2 #2.
Vision: We know how precious vision is, but not as keenly as when it begins to fail us.
We can probably do nothing about some of the normal, common age-related vision changes, other than making certain we and aging parents have adequate light.
For example, that little flashlight to read menus in darkly lit restaurants, or an additional light or lamp to distinguish between navy blue and black (specially for men selecting socks); and I'm not sure what needs to be invented to see the color gradations that delineate steps off of curbs or elsewhere.
(Restaurants usually go a good job of this with a contrasting color carpet or painted lines.)
That said, vision change can come on so gradually, we neglect doing anything about it, even when we realize we aren't seeing that well.
Continued on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com  Please visit!
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, April 11, 2012>
Some gentle questioning led to Mary's explaining that her sisters usually took their dad to his doctor appointments.
And they did offer to do things for him when the mood hit them.
For example, one sister asked if Mary would like her to take their Dad to a meeting of his men's club.
"I told her it was OK, I'd do it," Mary said, explaining that she was "so used to doing it, it really didn't make any difference."And that's where the red flag goes up.......
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to view entire post  caregiver siblingX caregiversX less-involved siblingsX reasons to accept helpX reasons to show appreciationX showing appreciation.
accepting helpX uninvolved siblings
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 10, 2012>
As I've mentioned on several occasions, the head of services for the elderly at a family counseling agency once told me that the child who would be caregiver for her/his aging parents could be identified early on--"the other children weren't so involved."
It took me by surprise.
Nevertheless, although my husband and I moved far from our families, I always knew I would be there for my parents when the time came.Does this negate commonly-held beliefs that children take on the caregiver role for other reasons?
(guilt, the realization parents did for them and it's payback time, the good feeling that helping others imparts, this sibling needs a life etc.
etc.)
*                       *                        *I returned home Sunday to a front door that would not unlock (from outside or inside), the smell of gas due to a pilot light that went out, and a car that wouldn't start so I was carless, with a large accumulation of mail.
I'm very behind in my life......So please ponder the question until tomorrow when I'll apply it to real life as I complete this post.
And go to http://helpparentsagewell, my other site, to view it more fully.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, April 6, 2012>
Should we give up expecting perfection?
"Is it culture or our psychological make-up that causes our stress and regret?
Do we, perhaps, place unrealistic expectations on ourselves- especially when we feel responsibility for aging parents?
"These are the questions posed to Senior Advisor, psychiatrist Dr.
Bud, after writing last Tuesday's post.
Thoughtfully explaining some of the emotional obstacles that can block even the most devoted adult children's quest for perfection, he begins..... continued on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 27, 2012>
And I wonder: Is it culture or our psychological make-up that causes our stress and regret?
Do we, perhaps, place unrealistic expectations on ourselves-- especially when we feel responsibility for those who need us at each end of the life cycle?
Please go to my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to view the rest of this post 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 24, 2012>
If our goal is to help parents age well until the end, I think anyone who understands the program would want to involve hospice when a parent's condition becomes terminal.
How to bring up the subject of hospice, with still-with-it parents, is the bigger question.
To view the entire post please visit my other site, http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, March 15, 2012>
It's gratifying for most of us when we can do something that helps others.
In my case, if I can contribute to older people's aging well, I'm a "happy camper."
My sincere thanks to Senior Homes.com, (http://www.seniorhomes.com) sponsor of this Best of the Web contest and to the panel of experts from the Senior Living industry who judged our blogs.
To view the specifics and the 10 categories in the competition (Help!
Aging Parents is in the "Consumers Resources" category--"best resources online for caregivers and their families"), click  http://www.seniorhomes.com/p/2012-best-of-the-web/.
All categories--with their nominees, finalists, winners, and "people's choice" selections--are on the left sidebar......a wealth of resources and valuable information for everyone with an interest in aging.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 14, 2012>
Last night, after dinner, 98-year-old R needed some groceries.
She requested going to Trader Joe's.
With her shopping list in hand, we were efficient.
Here's how she works/thinks everything out.First, she makes everything as easy as possible when it comes to meals.
Groceries are heavy, so she gives thought to the size/quantity she buys-always checking dates.
If she's with someone who can carry a heavy gallon of milk with a late future date, she'll buy it.
Otherwise, she buys a carton that weighs less.
This is a heads up when we shop for/with parents.......get the heavy stuff if it won't spoil.
To view this post in its entirely, visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 11, 2012>
We never know what resonates with aging parents.
Some reject "Big Brother" technology.
Some reject wearing alert-type technology (pendants/bracelets) or anything that makes them feel "old," or "different." The following can offer something new and/or acceptable to help parents age well in their homes.
To view the entire post, visit to my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, March 11, 2012>
Since, as you know, I'm a firm believer in helping aging parents stay in their homes as long as possible, I'm revisiting technology devices from past posts to help parents age in place.
(The most up-to-date information follows in my next post.)
Technological devices designed to help parents age well To see the entire post, visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 3, 2012>
....This very able daughter did it right.
She quietly helped as needed (bringing the tomato and dill from her garden, washed and ready to use), unobtrusively carrying in plates of food from kitchen to table, refilling glasses and clearing dishes before helping with the Tosca cake.
Yet it was clearly her mother's dinner party.
I began to think about adult children who--unasked--take over major responsibility at family dinners (among other things), once older mothers reach a certain age.
They decide (rightly or wrongly) it's too much work for an aging parent--period.
To read entire post go to my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 27, 2012>
 Continued from Saturday's post..... R has concluded, based on her 98 years on this earth: "Life is good, it's the people that mess it up."
To view entire blog, please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 25, 2012>
To begin, you need to know that like Grandma, her mother, R has devised expressions that she sprinkles throughout her conversation.
My favorite Grandma-saying "Angels Can Do No More" legitimizes the frustration when people do all they can--to seemingly no avail.
(I think about caregivers.)
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to read entire blog
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, February 23, 2012>
My "off-the-cuff" thought for these veterans who have no doubt given a lot and seem to have so little in life at this point, is to think "double it" when we are doing something nice for our parents.Can we get together with friends and double or triple or increase our output when we make/take/send cards, decorations, goodies and/or little holiday gifts to our parents?Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to view the rest of this post
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 18, 2012>
1.
A Little Help From My Friends....A quick call to my friend, Linda.
"Any chance you're free Friday or is that your bridge day?
""You're sort of right--sometimes it's my bridge day and it will be this Friday.
Jackie's mother is almost 90 and loves to play bridge.
So I play bridge with Jackie and her mother --not every Friday--but when I'm asked and that's this Friday.
".....Without Overloading FriendsHow thoughtful of Jackie...towards her mother as well as towards her friends.
Linda doesn't give up time every Friday.
No doubt Jackie, the daughter does, but involves different friends in such a way that she doesn't over-impose on their Fridays.Meanwhile, Jackie's giving her elderly mother something priceless, something special to look forward to--time with her daughter and several other women on Fridays.
This not only provides togetherness, socialization, and all the good that accompanies it (fresh ideas, connections)  but stimulation for the brain as well.2.
GamesYet games needn't be confined to bridge to stimulate the brain.........continued on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com .
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, February 13, 2012>
Wishing you and your parents aHappy Valentine's DayfromHelp Parents Age Well's BlogHelp!
Aging Parents
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, February 12, 2012>
"My elderly parents were the priority and I devoted myself to their needs.
For example, it meant so much to them to know they would be able to be driven to anything.
I never let them down.
For over a decade their evening social engagements as well as other commitments took precedence over plans my husband and I had and over plans with my friends....." Please visit my other site for the remainder of this post: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/02/12/career-aging-parents-caregiving-part-3-clarifying-the-quandry/
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 7, 2012>
Can Careers and Caregiving Exist Together?
I receive invitations to join Linkedin from former professional colleagues and current "fellow" (seems like a sexist adjective, but?)
board members.
Although I'm no longer working, I'm well aware of the difficulties juggling career and caregiving entail..... Is that why an invitation to join Linkedin--for those of us with aging parents--can elicit a yearning?
Or if we're already Linkedin, do we dare sneak a peek at the site without a pang of regret?
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to view remainder of this post.  
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 31, 2012>
Think Valentine's Day.
It's the opposite of aging parents--youth, lovers, girlfriends, boyfriends.
Do you remember how exciting Valentine's Day was when you were a teenager and young adult?
Perhaps the following, from a grandmother in her late-80's, sums up most older people's expectations for Valentine's Day: "In my younger days I sent Valentines to my 4 children and their children--my grandchildren.
I'd put a few dollars in the grandchidren's Valentine.
But I haven't done it recently--there are so many grandchildren and great-grandchildren now."
When I asked what she'd like for Valentine's day she laughed and said, "Any time someone thinks of you--it's nice.
It would be nice to get a Valentine in the mail, but I'm not expecting any."
To read the entire post go to my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 29, 2012>
Older people--aging parents and grandparents--welcome something special to please their taste buds--especially when they no longer drive, have less money for luxuries or just enjoy indulging.
That's why serious indulgences (things they probably wouldn't buy for themselves) plus a few healthy indulgences make perfect Valentine's Day gifts.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to view the rest of this post. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 25, 2012>
"Stop the world, I want to get off." A feeling of over-stress?
A cry for help?
A need for respite?
A needed vacation from aging parents?
Are caring readers of Help!
Aging Parents as good to themselves as they are to their aging parents?Often, it seems, the time when we are most stressed and need a break is when aging parents are in a somewhat "ify" state (but not in crisis), especially if it's going on and on.
To read entire blog please click link to my other site:http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/01/25/aging-parents-over-stressed-caring-children/
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 21, 2012>
Do we force/cajole/implore/push our aging parents-more than we should-to do what we'd like them to do to maintain their quality of life...ignoring the  possibility that they're weary of coping and depleted of energy?
Visit my other site http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/01/21/pushing-aging-parents-to-do-more-than-they-can-or-want-to-do/ for the rest of this post
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, January 18, 2012>
Having parents and grandparents come for a visit is usually very special for far-away-living children and grandchildren.
To ensure the travel process isn't derailed by unpleasant experiences, we want to be certain they are aware of the bulleted facts above... travel information to help parents and grandparents age well.
To view entire blog, visit my other site:http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/01/17/aging-parents-and-the-airport-body-scanner/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 15, 2012>
 Body Scans and Body Searches I worry about old people, who must endure a body search, for several reasons: First, they can easily have a crunched-up, forgotten Kleenex (if not their boarding pass)  in a pocket that puts them into the body-search mode........  ......continued on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.wordpress.com/2012/01/14/aging-parents-and-airports-happy-flying-or-headache-producing-part-2/ (if not their boarding pass)  
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 10, 2012>
We know childhood and adulthood; but do we know "elderhood?"
The goal of Help!
Aging Parents is to enable relatively healthy, aging parents--who live independently--to stay that way as long as possible and age well.
But I've wondered when "as long as possible" ends.
Clearly it doesn't end the moment aging parents are incapacitated by health issues....
I'd never heard of "elderhood," a term coined by geriatrician Dr. Bill Thomas (MD from Harvard Medical School) --until I watched and listened to an almost 26 minutes New Hampshire PBS video interview with him.
"Elderhood" follows adulthood and involves further growth that so many fail to recognize.
Understanding the concept can help us help our parents age well.
That's why I'm including the video link, which I urge you to watch and listen to.
Dr. Thomas's philosophy challenges the traditional concept of institutional care centers and home care.
His ideas encompass relationship changes (mother-daughter, husband-wife etc.)
and liberating ourselves by getting past our idea of being the indispensable caregiver; acknowledging the value of caregiving as a partnership; opening our eyes to the untapped richness of elderhood.
To view entire post please visit my other site:  http://helpparentsagewell.com/2012/01/08/aging-parents-whats-elderhood/ 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, January 1, 2012>
"With the new year approaching, what are your thoughts about the past year and the upcoming new year?"
This question was asked of a sampling of aging women, whose introspective, candid responses offer insights into sadness, concerns, resignation and hopes.
Some live independently in their homes; others in assisted living.
While the contrast is understandable, it surprised me initially.
"It was a wonderful year because I kept well and mobile, which is important not only to exist, but to live.
I hope I get through to another new year--the future can close in on you.
Not everyone can live to be 100."
(86) "All I know is you have to hope and pray things will get better.
The country is so torn apart.
I try to live my life in such a way that I still am in charge and I'm still involved.
But there's a certain amount of fear that I will lose this independence."
(90's) "Christmas (December) isn't the greatest time to be an older person.
Cards come in from friends--some aren't well, then a card comes from only Jean--not Jean and Richard and I realize Richard had been ill and has obviously died....
There's a melancholy about the past--you have more memories than you          have plans.
You know certain things aren't practical, possible.
Big chunks          of things that make life happy aren't there any more...I push it out of my          mind, telling myself how lucky I am...I must draw on the resources I have.
So I look forward to the new year when things return to normal and I           volunteer at the church and do another volunteer job.
A big part of life is           plans and future.
Without plans, a date on a calendar doesn't mean           anything."
(early 80's) "The world is---ugh!
I don't like listening to the news.
And lately I've heard of so many people I know falling.
You don't know what's going to happen next."
(89) "It's not comfortable living in this world with all of its problems.
Some nights I go to bed and don't want to wake up.
Looking forward: I'm concerned about my children--will they remain close, how will they be after I go."
(83) "My husband is very ill." Looking forward: "I'm hoping he passes away before I do because he couldn't handle things alone."
(78) "I feel like I've been put here by my children."
Looking forward: "I worry about my grandchildren's future...the kind of world it will be."
"I'm lucky I got this far (after serious health issues) and got to meet my new great- grandchild...and hope I'll be around to watch her grow next year.
I'm feeling sorry for myself--I ended up here.
I don't like feeling this way.
Then I look at the picture of that beautiful baby and I'm glad I'm here."
(86) As we make our New Year's resolutions, the above may provide ideas when thinking about helping our aging parents.
There's uncertainty ahead as always, but perhaps more of it in today's world for both young and old....but then again, there's also hope.
May 2012 be a good year for you and your aging parents as we try to help parents age well.
(PS.
The first 4 responses are from people living independently; the last 4 are from those in assisted living.)
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 26, 2011>
What happens after an event takes place, an event that we've been anticipating-hearing about well in advance?
We are left with the emotional residue-wonderful or not so wonderful, depending.
Regardless of the event, it happens (present tense).
Then it's over.
Ended.
Done.
5 Suggestions for Understanding and Elevating the After-Christmas Let-DownContinued on my other site.
Please go to http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 24, 2011>
Demanding mother, cigar-smoking father, less-than-enthusiastic spouse=Nightmare?"Holidays are a time for family." How often we hear this.
When immediate family includes children young enough to believe in Santa and delight in the Chanukah celebrations there's a certain quality that's infectious.
Ideally three generations enjoy a warm and fuzzy togetherness.
But..........
?Time to call upon our senior advisor psychiatrist, Dr.
Bud.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com for the rest of this post--Happy Holidays!
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 20, 2011>
In a world of unrest and uncertainty the colors and twinkling of the holiday lights on homes seem-in a way- protective, signaling all is well within.
And so I tried-and successfully found-the same streets as last Christmas eve.
And we were rewarded as we drove slowly-block after block.
My friend's macular degeneration necessitated her no longer driving----  --to view complete post please visit my other website: http://helpparentsagewell.com 
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, December 12, 2011>
Set In Our Ways?
Creatures of Habit?Open to Change?
I remember, when I was very young, overhearing my dad's concerned conversation about his widowed sister's not being interested in remarrying.
As I recall he said something to the effect that if she waited too long, she'd be set in her ways, and then she'd never remarry.At that age all I knew was Cinderella, pictures of beautiful brides, and Prince Charming.
How could she not want to remarry?
What was "set in her ways?
"Visit http://helpparentsagewell.com to view the rest of this post.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 7, 2011>
Her father had early dementia in his early 90's.
At that time she gently discussed whether or not he thought a different living situation would make sense.
It was too soon for him, but the idea was planted.
A few years later when he could still think clearly some of the time and she could capture the moment, she again broached the question.
His response: "I don't want to give up being the boss yet."
That's it, isn't it?
Pure and simple.
Please visit http://helpparentsagewell.com, my other site for the rest of this post.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 4, 2011>
Six suggestions for inexpensive gifts that help parents age well 1.
A wide-ish rubber band (often found around produce like celery) that can be stretched around something that's hard-to-unscrew like a little bottle cap or a jar lid of any size.
Unlike the contraptions or rubber disks one can buy, this costs nothing, takes up no room, is easily replaced when worn out or lost and gives the gripping power most older people are losing...or have basically lost.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to view the rest of this post.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 28, 2011>
There's a never-worn St. John knit hanging in my closet.
Normally a very pricey label, it was so inexpensive (these are the "buys" you can find in NY) I couldn't resist getting it for my mother years ago--her size, her color, two piece.
But she never wore it.
Why?
At age 83, she tactfully told me that she didn't wear short sleeves because of flabby arms.
Who knew?
Something to think about when selecting clothing: our aging mothers' particular wants and needs, as well as challenges.
Can can they button and unbutton easily?
What about hooks and eyes?
clasps to necklaces?
things that zip, button in back etc.
etc.
Do they want to downplay/hide certain parts of their body?
Senior advisor R, 98, has always had success with catalogs.
And she always looks well-put-together.
Check out the following favorite catalog sites--not aimed at older women but with today's styles appropriate for older women.
Do this with your mother if you want to entertain her a bit.
There's what counselors call "a hidden agenda" here.
You also find out what your mother likes/wants and can easily order it later.
Please visit my other site: helpparentsagewell.com to read post in its entirety.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 25, 2011>
With Black Friday upon us, these 3 gift options can make reading easier for aging parents.
Carefully check out their specific attributes.
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com for entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 23, 2011>
As we all know and have seen documented so many times, "connections with others" is one of the most important factors in aging well.
Thanksgiving connects the generations by just being together as well as through conversation.
It also provides opportunities to contribute-in large or small ways-which especially makes older people feel worthwhile, needed.
And isn't that a priceless gift.Dad could never make the pumpkin chiffon pie that Mother continued to make in her mid-80's.
But Dad could string that cranberry necklace up until his last Thanksgiving at age 94.
With warm wishes for a Happy Thanksgiving.
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com for the complete post.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, November 21, 2011>
Why Some Make the Effort, While Others Don'tSenior Advisor, 98-year-old R, discussed this over dinner at a restaurant the other night.
She highlighted how much harder it is to do every-day things with each passing year and the discipline and mental motivation involved-even for those who have (to use her mother's term) "a good head on their shoulders." Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to read complete post 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 5, 2011>
Our moving day is fast approaching.
There's always so much more to do than one anticipates.
Thinking about aging parents and elderly people going through this process makes me wonder how they do it......
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to see this entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 2, 2011>
I think this decorated pumpkin could be given to anyone--old or young, in a care facility or living independently--between now and Thanksgiving.
Just glue-gun a little turkey or on top--and use some dried wheat, perhaps....
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com for entire post.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, October 24, 2011>
Senior Advisor, R, recently told me she now felt "old." Most would say "she's 98.
She should feel old."  Yet I truly believe that wasn't the case until she recently expressed that new feeling, caused by: a cane.
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to see this post
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 18, 2011>
Please visit my other site for this post:   http://helpparentsagewell.com/2011/10/18/6-easy-outings-for-mobility-challenged-aging-parents-and-others/
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 9, 2011>
Even scarier is the fact that elderly people in their own homes can become confused and forget if the red pill is for hives and the green pill is for heart or vice versa.
Click on this website which displays a color picture of every medication you search (it's easily printed).
Please go to my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to continue.... 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 4, 2011>
Do you know the optimum age at which parents should move?
Clue: It's a wake-up call.
Please view first part of this post on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 2, 2011>
Weddings and bridal showers are usually intergenerational events.
The celebratory feeling during that time gives old and young the opportunity to easily interact, sharing--for a brief period-- a commonality most of us have experienced.
My friend's mother--86, independent and in-charge--had a diminishing experience at her granddaughter's bridal shower, an experience even my friend, Katy (a perfect aging parent's daughter) couldn't have anticipated.
Continued on my other site:http:helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 1, 2011>
Until tomorrow......
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, September 28, 2011>
 Please go to my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com for this blog.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 27, 2011>
A 97-year-old, dear friend died this weekend.
Far-away-living children stayed with us as a result which was good for all of us.
Tomorrow I think I will address the question: Does Helping Parents Age Well, Include Helping Them Die Well?
Until then......
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 24, 2011>
"Older people don't want to be rushed" (by their children or anyone else)We heard it in last Saturday's post, from an organized, "with-it," 98-year-old parent who values maintaining control.
So we aren't clueless.
But it's a "heads up." When doing things with older parents-even with parents who live orderly, organized lives-we need to allow extra time so we don't need to rush, subjecting ourselves-and them-to more pressure than already exists.See entire post on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 20, 2011>
Reading about the importance of connections and being engaged is one thing.
Watching and listening to this 101-year-old woman, makes the case in a real way--instructive for helping parents age well (and instructive for us too).
Please go to my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 17, 2011>
We notice parents slowing down.
They take more time to do things.
Does their snail's pace drive us crazy?
Do we make them crazy if we try to rush them?In a fast-paced world of multi-taskers, aging parents can seem out of step-literally.
At a certain point we realize they walk slower, drive slower, think slower, ponder longer.
Some who were formerly quick decision-makers may seemingly take an eternity to make a decision.
It simply takes longer for them to get things done.To be continued tomorrow......on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 13, 2011>
The best example of aging well: a model (and mentor) for adult children  Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com  for this post
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 11, 2011>
Please read blog on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, September 7, 2011>
Posted on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 6, 2011>
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 3, 2011>
Heads up if you work in your older parents' business and they depend on you for all things computerAs readers know we are renovating an apartment with a building-imposed renovation deadline of September 16th-less than 2 weeks away.
Our highly regarded,  renovation company may not meet it.
True, there have been unforeseen problems that caught everyone off guard, yet the major problems could have been quickly and capably handled if the older generation (founders of the company, still working with their technologically capable boomer sons) instinctively thought "computers" instead of writing in longhand.I've posted about 60-year-olds who cavalierly say they don't use a computer and don't plan to-that their children do anything that involves a computer for them.
If we raised our children doing for them instead of teaching them to do for themselves, wouldn't we-in effect-be crippling them?These older dads are so accustomed to depending on their sons for anything involving a computer, that they're oblivious to the wasted time and significant errors they themselves generate.Think: handwriting selections and sizes for cabinets knobs, handles, colors, tile selection etc.
etc.
which then get lost or misread and need to be redone-again in longhand.
Think about needing to make changes in a kitchen plan, then needing to phone to get information for Fed-Exing those plans because the aging parents don't realize that plans can be technologically reduced and emailed or faxed almost instantaneously.
One man who can email (when he remembers to check his emails) says he'll take a just-reworked plan home to his wife, who he thinks can reduce and email it.
And finally (no, not really, but I don't want to bore anyone with too many examples) what about the oven unit where specific dimensions from floor to top of bottom oven and to top of upper oven are emailed..... and the top oven comes with the opening too high up to reach?
The older dad must have forgotten to forward my email, with specific oven dimensions to the cabinet company.
Why?
Because this older man-not a bad person, in fact a very nice person-has never made technology use part of his daily life.
I think he relies on his memory (probably more accurate in the old days) and forgets there's something in writing awaiting him on his computer (which probably no one has ever organized for him).My followers know I have great empathy for older people/aging parents.
And I'm not really certain it's the fault of mentally able aging parents if they haven't progressed technologically.
If their children do it for them, why should parents bother to learn?
(If we did things for our children how could they have learned?
)The two founders of the company are guiding the work on our apartment.
One has no computer knowledge; the other, mentioned earlier, has a computer he is rarely disciplined about using.
Clearly these men think they're doing their best but in today's world they can't deliver as quickly or as accurately.
Sadly their Boomer sons aren't helping.To help parents age well, we need to equip them for this century if we want to help them remain "in the game."  It's even more important if they are in business and rely on us (adult children) to do the technological part.
Helpful as that may seem, it doesn't help; it cripples.It's sad to see fine older men needing to apologize, scrambling to come up with quick fixes, and laughingly saying these problems are "giving them a heart attack." Indeed most of the problems could have been avoided if-from the start-they were comfortable using a computer.
In the next post we'll address: teaching older adults how to use a computer.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 30, 2011>
Please visit my other site http://helpparentsagewell.com to see this post
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, August 25, 2011>
Please visit my other site-- http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, August 21, 2011>
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com for this post
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 16, 2011>
PLEASE VISIT MY OTHER WEBSITE: http:helpparentsagewell.com  Same blog, additional resources.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 13, 2011>
Please read this blog at my other site: http:helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 9, 2011>
Please visit my website: http://helpparentsagewell.com for today's blog
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, August 8, 2011>
Please visit my other site:http://helpparentsagewell.com Thank you.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, August 3, 2011>
Beware!
Diminishing, Demeaning--Undoubtedly Making Older People Feel Like Excess.
Do we cringe when someone diminishes an aging person?
Do we even notice?
(For me, it's like someone running their fingernails over one of those old, chalk blackboards of our youth.)
Once sensitized, we realize it's a common daily occurence, although possibly unwittingly.
Let's look at 3 examples.
1.
Many people assume if you're old, you can't be treated like a normal functioning human being.
I don't think it's mean-spirited, it rather seems like a given that accompanies aging.
Is it thoughtless or a response to a stereotyped idea of older people?
While, there's no strong lobbying voice yet to create the awareness that it's not politically correct, I'm guessing things will change as Boomers age a bit more, .
In the meantime, be aware of the many alert, mentally capable elderly people whose lives are unintentionally diminished by unthinking people--trying to be helpful when unnecessary, talking unnaturally to them assuming they don't understand or can't hear (you'll think of other things) and try to reduce possibilities for your parents.
2.
What's in a name?
How often do caregivers and others call older people by diminishing names?
Honey, Sweety, Dear, Darling.
I think of Sidney Potier in The Heat of the Night saying: "They call me Mr. Tibbs," after being addressed as "boy" by a southerner in the movie.
Many older parents hesitate to correct people, especially when they depend on them as caregivers or hospital staff.
I think of a good friend's mother who, for her entire life, wanted to be addressed as "Mrs.
Miller."
A fine line existed that no one should cross if they wanted a relationship with-- and/or cooperation from--her.
That fine line included anything that diminished dignity and unearned familiarity fell into that category.
As she aged and grew more fragile, trips to "emergency" increased.
With each visit, the first thing her son made clear was to call her "Mrs.
Miller."
She required that respect; they needed to comply.
In the same vein, I recall a college rep from California visiting East Cost high schools.
She was worried--because she was away and her mother was hospitalized--that someone would call her "Honey" or "Sweetie" and her mother would cave into the diminished feeling and not make the needed effort to recover from a serious health event.
3.
Older people in wheel chairs don't escape being diminished, in fact often they're treated like they aren't even there when accompanied by a younger person.
I think about Katy's mother who, in her late-80's, needed a wheel chair when there was a lot of walking involved.
She was a smart, with-it woman, married to a judge.
Katy noticed that if they were going shopping, for example, the "sales associate" would address remarks to Katy, even though Katy's mother initiated the conversation.
Katy reports this occurred in doctors' offices, at hospital registration, you name it.
Contrast this to going taking our smart, with-it teenager (who's in a wheel chair for some not-observable reason) shopping.
If he/she initiates a question, our teenager is answered, the clerk doesn't look past the teenage to answer us.
Check it out!
When we find ourselves involved in a Katy's-mother-type experience think about Katy's response, "You know, Mother asked the question."
It's a good model.
It nicely redirects the conversation to her mother so the mother maintains self-esteem and the sales person or whoever is aware of the competent elder person he/she should be speaking to.
(And even if he/she doesn't "get it" completely, our parent isn't demeaned by exclusion from the conversation.)
We are so often on fast-forward that these diminishing experiences can be easily ignored.
But older parents, who usually have less going on in their lives and therefore may attach greater significance to things we hardly notice, say: "It chips away a little at a time."
Obviously to help parents age well, we don't want them to feel "chipped away."
Visit my other site: htttp://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same post, more informative tabs. 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 30, 2011>
Aging parents' secrets.
Paving the way for them to share with us.
"If parents  keep secrets, they may well feel guilt about it," according to Dr.
Bud, our Senior Advisor psychiatrist.
Confiding in someone can rid them of guilty feelings--be it someone outside the family or a family member if they feel the latter is safe and "coming clean" won't result in forced moving to assisted living, being car-less, or worse.
In my July 24th post, we learn that an 88-year-old woman suffered numerous falls, without telling supportive family members, and ultimately a broken hip.
All caused by poor balance that a device in her shoe would have easily corrected.
We learned some of the reasons in that post.
Tips to encourage secret sharing: Mindset: think "tuning in to the age--to the stage in life--to the degree of their concern and our concern; realizing maybe it's also aging parents' concern, but they don't want to talk about it," suggests Dr.
Bud.
Next look for opportunities--perhaps in other people-- that "open the door" for discussing commonly-held senior secrets.
Simply using anecdotes about others will convey your empathy, compassion and your aversion to quick judgments and knee-jerk reactions.
Three examples of conversation starters: empathy 1.
Hearing about someone: "I saw your friend, Edith, the other day.
She's now using a walker.
It must be really tough on Edith....." information 2.
"Jim called me this morning.
Said he didn't sleep well last night.
He made someone a promise it's not correct to keep, and it's bothering him because it's something the family needs to know--it involves an older person's well-being.
He's really in a tough spot."
thinking out loud 3.
"I was getting out of the car.
An older woman--older than you, Mom, fell then got herself up; and it occurred to me is she going to tell someone or is she afraid?
And I thought about you and checking these things, and would you be able to tell me if it were you?
When we construct these scenarios, it helps aging parents understand not only their own fears but our sensitivity to them.
And when older people can confide secrets, they get through the guilt or fear or feelings of foolishness (can acknowledge their fault if they did something stupid--ie.
lost something important).
Dr.
Bud agrees that it's OK to tell a little white lie by making up a story as in the above examples.
It hurts no one and can lead to conversations that significantly affect older people's well being.
Dr.
Bud also thinks acknowledging fear is helpful.
There are probably many opportunities to do this--in an arm's length way of course.
Aging parents' friends are no doubt experiencing issues that could necessitate giving up their homes, their cars or making other significant changes.
Hearing about these issues from parents, presents an opportunity to chime in with something like: If the doctor recommended it, we would have to listen to his/her reasons before making a judgment and also see what others recommend--which could involve getting a second opinion.
Have they thought about that?
Hopefully in our efforts to help parents age well some of these anecdotes define our empathy and understanding and make parents feel safe to share secrets.
Remember our parents have known us for a long time.
Visit my other blog: http:helpparentsagewell.com.
Same post, more information
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, July 27, 2011>
You'll see this comment below Saturday's post.
"What a great article, it's so true- seniors avoid telling their children important things for fear of the reaction.
It would be great to get some tips on how to have these conversations with our aging parents, and yet still respect their independence and dignity."
I've heard people say it's sometimes easier to "share feelings with strangers."
Trying to personalize this I immediately thought of being on an airplane, sitting next to a complete stranger and sharing a conversation containing thoughts and feelings that could never have been shared with someone who knew anything about me or anyone who knew me  Have you experienced this?There's a degree of safety in anonymity and there's a degree of safety on a plane.
There's also objective listening on the part of both participants, who know nothing about each other so if there's a judgment to be made, there's nothing personal attached--nor can anyone come back later to say "I told you so" (or "not to" or whatever).Can this translate into a conversation of shared secrets with aging parents?
We share secrets with parents when we're kids; but it doesn't seem to be prevalent the other way around, does it?So the question is, can we create a safe environment in which aging parents feel as safe sharing secrets with us, as they might on an airplane with a stranger?And here's what I see as the problem: With a complete stranger, trust isn't an issue since no ones knows who we are and we've chosen what we want them to know about us.
If we owned Harry Potter's wand, we could make the relationship with our aging parents disappear...and come back as new.
But we can't, so how do we develop that trust?
Must it be nurtured decades back?
Is now too late?I have some thoughts which I wanted to bounce off Senior Advisor, psychiatrist, Dr.
Bud, but he's unavailable for a few days.
In the meantime, feel free to contribute thoughts, and I'll be back Saturday--hopefully with a few good tips......so don't go away for long.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com  Same blog, more information
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 26, 2011>
The renovation of the apartment plus things requiring attention but ignored in order to get our home ready to sell, made it impossible to post today's blog.
Tomorrow should work fine, so check back the later part of the day.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, July 24, 2011>
The following situations and reactions are not exclusive to aging parents.
Where older people are involved, however, the consequences are different.
They can significantly change parents' lives.
Even in the best of relationships, most parents won't tell us-- 1.
--THEY'VE FALLEN.
Why?
Pride: A remarkable 88-year-old mother fell and bounced back to normal many times without anyone's knowing (or if they knew, they'd been sworn to secrecy) until she broke her 88-year-old hip and her devoted daughter found out.
It turns out a simple corrective device, placed in her shoes, was all that was needed to solve the balance problem that caused the falls in the first place.
But the solution came after enduring surgery and rehabilitation for her hip.
While she's still a spunky and amazing 88-year-old, it did "take her down a notch," according to her daughter.
Why?
Fear of being forced to give up their home and go someplace where their adult children think falls are less likely--be it moving from a home with stairs to a one-floor apartment or to independent or assisted living, or coming to live with their adult children (granted, much less likely today than it was in previous generations).
2.
--THEY'VE HAD A DRIVING INCIDENT.
Why?
Fear they'll be made to stop driving.
But this needn't be if solvable medical issues are involved and family members know about resources that evaluate older people's driving and may help them to drive longer: http://www.usaaedfoundation.org/ (click "health and safety" for The Effects of Aging on Driving Skills).
Check AAA's brochures http://www.aaafoundation.org, click "products," "free," and scroll down for brochures that resonate ie.
The Older and Wiser Driver and Drivers 65 Plus.
If safe-driving parents can legitimately continue to drive (possibly aided by programs like CarFit), it's easier and happier for everyone.
If parents are no longer qualified to drive, it's based on objective evidence.
3.
--THEIR PROBLEMS/CONCERNS.
Why?
They still feel protective towards their children, don't want to burden them, especially if the children have their own problems of deal with.
Why?
They don't want to chance being told what to do, they want someone to listen-- someone who they know cares--to bounce ideas off of.
4.
--CERTAIN INTERACTIONS THEY KNOW COULD BE JUDGMENTAL.
Why?
No one wants a lecture or being told what to do, be they children, young adults or old adults.
One independent-living, 80-something-year old father said  several years ago: "I told my daughter I was going to the movie with a friend and immediately was told it wasn't wise because of swine flu.
Come on.
Children and people with certain conditions and are most at risk and I'm neither." Another 80-year-old sums up the feelings of many when she confidently says "I still think I can make my own decisions." How many aging parents can identify with the short poem below?
Can't remember where it came from, but I saved it.
Our children have knowledge of important things Things that they think we should know Forgetting we told them those very same things When they were young-- years ago.
As we try to help parents age well, it's food for thought.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com  Same blog, more resources
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 23, 2011>
Once we've moved I expect to post as originally planned--Tuesdays and Saturdays.
While in this transition, so much is unpredictable; so like today, there will be--and have been--times I must postpone my blog by a day.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 19, 2011>
WHERE?
A drive of an hour (more or less) offers a change of scenery--a beautiful view from any coast, lake, or river, plus a perfect setting for lunch (or picnic if doable) with aging parents.
(Remember the water and sunscreen.)
Touristy or not natural attractions take people out of themselves, into what's real.
Clearly a change for aging parents who don't drive much--or at all.
For example, I think of Multnomah Falls (Columbia River Highway out of Portland, Oregon), which Sr. Advisor, R, visited with us 2 summers ago, when she was 95.
Loved the drive along the river, the falls is spectacular, and the restaurant lovely (check to see if reservations are advised)...or take a picnic.
Last weekend, for example, we were in Massachusetts--the Stockbridge, Lenox, Williamstown, Bennington area--all within a short driving distance.
Lots of music, art plus theater and dance.
(Such options may be near you.)
We attended two Tanglewood performances--the Boston Symphony at night; the Boston Pops on Sunday afternoon.
These kinds of concerts attract older people--lots of gray hair and canes and a few bus tours at night; loads of walkers, wheelchairs, canes as well as an uncountable number of buses, clearly marked "Senior Tours" for the daytime Boston Pops.
It seems loads of aging parents and grandparents enjoy summer music outings; so many take day bus tours.
An older woman in front of me proudly told me she had driven herself to the Sunday concert.
She lived close and was soon joined by the 40-something (thoughtful) neighbors, who often give her a ticket.
Culture abounds: The Clark museum (Williamstown, Mass.)
-- world-class paintings, user-friendly for older people (handicap accessible, wheelchairs, elevators, benches, excellent cafe).
The Norman Rockwell Museum in Stockbridge, Mass.
and the Bennington Museum in Vermont with its Grandma Moses collection, are gems.
The latter should be uplifting.
Grandma Moses was still painting at 100.
When living near parents, driving them to small towns they used to frequent but don't drive to any more, is a welcome outing...sometimes perhaps they can bring a friend.
I know Sr. Advisor, R, has a friend whose daughter often includes R in short outings.
She has a wonderful time--it means so much to her...and she usually treats them to lunch.
Zoos, local museums, a drive around the old neighborhood (past their old school if it's still standing), a picnic in a park, an unexpected trip to the mall--the options are only limited by our imagination and, I guess, finances.
A destination outing or a simple drive with lunch or a midday meal helps parents age well--gives older people a lift--something to think and talk about.
And we too can enjoy that.
Visit my other site http://helpparentsagewell.com for photos    
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 16, 2011>
Discussing end-of-life issues with aging parents is uncomfortable for so many.
Several previous posts discuss this, focusing on various aspects.
For example, "Aging Parents, Adult Children: Control and End-of-Life Issues" (9/10/10) points out some of the reasons these discussions don't happen: 1.
Denial on the part of parents and children (note: denial is an unconscious mechanism that keeps us from dealing with something until we are ready)2. consciously not wanting to face the inevitable3.
superstition (if we talk about it, it may happen)4. keeping children clueless (maintains parental control).Dad was in his mid-80's.
We needed to have this kind of conversation which I had thought about for quite a while.
The question was how to begin.
I don't remember exactly how I ultimately broached the subject, but after Mother began having tia's I managed to do it.Fortunately the Wall Street Journal has just paved the way for such a discussion in an article aimed at older people, The 25 Documents You Need Before You Die (July 2, 2011).
(Children in their 50's are used in the examples.)
It is helpful, excellent information for aging parents.
And therein lies our opportunity--or at least step one.Our senior advisor, RHW, Esq., reviewed the article, thought it was very well done and offered one addition.
The article lists will, revocable trust, and "letter of instruction" as "The Essentials."
While the Durable Financial Power of Attorney is mentioned as an "also" in the essentials paragraph, it is not an "also" in his opinion.
He emphasizes "more than enything else the Durable Financial Power of Attorney can prevent the courts from having to appoint a guardian or conservator--an expensive and often cumbersome procedure."
It is essential in giving parents control over who has this financial power and should be a 4th "essential."
You could mention that for starters--or not.
Period.A discussion about wills etc.
needn't take place the moment we hand parents the WSJ article or (if they're WSJ subscribers) ask them if they've read it.
We'll know, however, that they have good information at their fingertips.
And isn't helping parents get their affairs in order part of helping parents age well?
......Of course we'll also know we've opened the door for future discussions.Check out my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com  More information, same blog.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 12, 2011>
How difficult is it to remember to take medications?
Do the number of medications and a good memory determine that?
Or is there more to consider?
(Of course, read on.)
For young adults it's easy.
Most have few prescription medications and probably some vitamins--no doubt often gulped down at the same time each day.
But what about older people and aging parents?
People over 55, on average, take  6-8 medications daily, according to a July 5, 2011 NY Times article.
I wonder if that number includes vitamins.
Dealing with 3 medical conditions is average for a 75-year-old, according to the Alliance for Aging Research presented in a Tufts University Health & Nutrition Letter article (August 2002).
This necessitates about 5 prescription drugs simultaneously, although the article says the number could go as high as 15 prescription drugs.
There are of course organizers--from the inexpensive plastic pill-organizing boxes to the more expensive technological products like Philips and Guardian that remind people to take their medications.
But this may be only part of the issue.
The July 5, 2011 NY Times article, "When 'Take as Directed' Poses a Challenge" addresses  another important aspect.
It never occurred to me that "take every 12 hours" and "take twice a day" could cause confusion or be burdensome.
In our efforts to help parents, who take medications, age well, this article is more than worthwhile....and if you wonder if aging parents may be skipping medications, it's a must-read.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 9, 2011>
Being smack in the middle of downsizing--preparing to move after decades in one's home--is daunting.
The thought was daunting even before we began.
Everyone comments "How exciting!"
when hearing a NY city apartment awaits us.
True, it is exciting to think about moving back to NYC where we lived for several years after graduate school; but we've been too busy to give much time to that kind of thinking.
Another kind of thinking continually pops into my head, however.
It's the thought that moving from one's home at any age is unsettling.
When we consider the stress and feelings we experience and we've initiated the move, we can understand why thoughts of moving from their home is so distressing for older people.
3 Reasons  If it's a move that aging parents haven't initiated, often to assisted living on a "campus" with facilities for levels of care, it's in-their-face recognition that: ---they are unable to carry on life as they have for so many decades ---others recognize this and no longer have confidence in their abilities to remain as  independent as they have been ---this is probably their last stop before the cemetery.
Moving under these circumstances understandably triggers feelings of many types of loss: of abilities, of self-esteem, of independence, of optimism.
It must be accompanied by an overarching sense of what was and what lies ahead.
For older people who feel forced to move this must be very sobering.
I think of all the memories that surface with every box and folder that is opened, with every photo and piece of saved stuff that is examined.
My husband and I smile and think of how of good it was, forgetting the challenges which seemed so big at the time.
We are looking forward, not moving that far from our present community, and it's exciting.
Yet I know realistically there will be a time when we will look back, assuming we reach a ripe old age.
Upon reaching 89 Dad often said, "When you can look back many more years than you can look forward, you know you're old."
I truly don't think he felt old until he began saying that.
Perhaps it's because he never had to move, he never confronted that kind of sobering change and the feelings of loss that go with it.
Yet clearly, living that long, Dad experienced many kinds of loss.
Understanding the components of moving--which involve change, energy, downsizing, and organization and loss--provides us with sensitivity to their impact and understandings to help our aging parents and think twice before initiating unnecessary change.
Won't it also help us when the time comes?
Check out my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same blog, more information. 
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, July 7, 2011>
According to the Myers-Briggs (its short-cut name) I am an ESTP and I'm positive my husband is an INTJ, even though he's never taken this inventory.
Very simply, our preferred way of doing things (which is what the Myers-Briggs scores) is quite different, even though we share values and the way we look at most things.Note the first of the 4 letters.My husband, the high-scoring "I" personality type--thinks before taking action.
Example: the student who wants to digest the question and carefully think out the answer before raising his or her hand.
On the other hand, the high-scoring "E" personality types' hands go up first, even if they have only a partial answer.
More outwardly active describes the "E" personality type.
(Teachers learn the slow-to-raise-their-hand-kids may have just as good or a better answer than the kids with the quickly raised hands.
)Then there's the 2nd letter showing our preferred way of looking at things--the Forest or Trees?
High-scoring "N" types see the forest first (the overall picture, macro).
High-scoring "S" types see the trees first (the specifics/details, micro).We both scored high on the third letter "T" (thinking).
The other option is an "F" (feeling) and while I scored higher on the "T" part, I scored pretty high on the "F" part also--which happens.
High-scoring "T" types begin thinking when looking for answers; "F" types lead with feelings.Lastly, my husband's "J."
High-scoring "J" types judge quickly; they put the facts together, make a decision.
Done.
On the other hand "P" types take longer to make decisions--they're thinking of every possible option.This is all very simplistic.
Yet it helps us appreciate others' ways of doing things.So how do we go about organizing for downsizing and moving?As we work and organize with others--and realize we may approach things differently and still have successful results--we share the burden.My husband and I give each other space to work in our comfort zones, although I'm certain my husband secretly wonders if I will even get through all the drawers, closets, boxes, papers etc.He in his "super-organized fashion" decided to tackle the boxes of stuff in the attic first, then go to the file drawers.
I tackled things as the spirit moved me.
First: my clothes (closet and drawers).
It felt good to give some away to people or to those clothing drop boxes, and to see closet and drawer space expand.We both agreed about books we would keep, so that was easy; meanwhile, his boxes have been emptied, material shredded, keepsakes and meaningful stuff saved.Needless to say, my pile of saved objects is larger than my husband's due to my "P" inclination.
I see many future uses for things, which causes delayed decision making.
I must remind myself I did score much lower on the "J" part of my preferences.
And I know my "P" inclination to save could keep me from ever finishing the task ahead, so at times I make judgments--dumping things I've come to realize I'll never use again, before I can change my mind.My scattered successful attempts are not nearly as noticeable as my husband's dozens of empty cartons and cleared folders, but I know I'll finish by our deadline.
Fortunately, he leaves me alone to plow through in my own way.
After many years he realizes I do meet my commitments on time, my way of doing it is just not his way.If you want to delve further into Myers Briggs, check out the organization's site: http://www.myersbriggs.org/  click My MBTI Personality Type then MBTI Basics or  /http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Myers-BriggsType Indicator and scroll down to "Types.
"You can take the inventory on line although I can't judge the sites.
(I took it in class, under the guidance of a professional.)
So I add a disclaimer as to its validity but for fun you might try the myersbrigs.org site above or  http://www.humanmetrics.com/cgi-win/jtypes2.asp.PS.
The "S" in my  ESTP initially saw the specific contents of our home as overwhelming.
But once I found a specific starting point that inspired me to action, I was on my way.Good luck!
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 5, 2011>
Good organization obviously saves energy, time, friction.
Clearly some people seem born as good organizers, while others???
Clearly aren't.Downsizing and moving involve daunting tasks--believe me, I know first hand right now.
I've also always known my husband is an excellent organizer--much more disciplined than I (I'm more often propelled by instinct and inspiration).We are different personality types and have different ways of accomplishing things.
And we both get them done, which is the point of this post.
There is no right or wrong way if the goal is met.More specifically there is a well-known personality type "test," the Myers-Briggs Personality Type Indicator.
There's no right or wrong answer.
For example, if I ask you to raise your hand, some will raise the right hand, others the left.
There's a preferred way for some (use the right hand) while for others it's the left hand.
But neither way is better.
We teach this in some depth to our 10th graders.
You'll catch on quickly also.Without going into too much detail, I'll illustrate examples as they affect my husband's and my organization for this move.
When people work well--and the same way--together everyone is on the same page and things should work well.
But when people's way of organizing is radically different, needless friction can arise.
Obviously if help is needed from someone who's never organized and who can never be counted on, a completely different strategy is called for.We're talking about behavior here and organizing for a common goal.
Since I only have time to write in snip-its due to my current downsizing/moving situation, tomorrow I will present opposite organizational habits with equally successful results.
The immediate goal is to help aging parents when they need to downsize or move.
Understanding the way they effectively organize (or not) and the way we organize should help things go more smoothly.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 2, 2011>
.................And whose energy?
A former colleague, Anna, now a current friend in her late 80's, phoned me yesterday to tell me she was going away for the weekend; she was also wondering how I was progressing with our downsizing.
I enumerated the things I'd been doing and the fact that I was very tired at the end of the day.
I started thinking about the impact of aging on one's energy.I remembered a lunch date with another former colleague, a year ago.
Because she's almost 60, retirement was part of our discussion.
And energy was a big part of that discussion.She's a master teacher and brilliant.
She has published, has a stellar reputation and a devoted following of students.
While she believes that she's an even better teacher than when she was younger, she is also aware that the energy you have at almost 60 isn't the energy you had at 50.
Looking back we agreed that in your 40's you have a great deal of energy, definitely enough to spare.I've long held the notion most of us reach our peak in our 40's, remain at that level for quite a while.
Yet, almost imperceptibly, energy begins to decline.
We can easily compensate for it initially because we are older and wiser.
But it finally catches up with us.Less than two years ago Anna and her husband downsized from a large home with over 50 years of accumulation to a good-sized apartment.
Anna's mind is excellent, she swam daily until the house was sold and she remains interested in everything.Her many children and grandchildren were only too happy to help these aging parents/grandparents pack and move.
But Anna tells me that, although she didn't have to be concerned with the physical part, the mental energy required was tiring.
Even after showing younger people what needed to be done and how to do it, it often wasn't done just the way Anna wanted.
So she did much of it herself.Can adult children argue with that?
If we're creating additional mental stress while trying to be helpful and preserve older peoples' energy, are we helping?
And how do we help in a way that respects everyone's wishes, time, and abilities?
If we can answer that last question, we can offer our greater supply of energy, have grateful aging parents and grandparents, and feel good.But most of our parents (as well as ourselves) put off downsizing until we realize we aren't as able as we were and may not have the energy if we wait much longer.
The earlier everyone starts, the better.Note, Boomers:  Some children, who are old enough to care, could care less about their parents' treasures.
Some parents--aging or not, moving or not--are giving things to their children, including old photos that may or may not be in albums.
(The photos  of course need identification if they're to have meaning.
I think we all know the frustration of looking through an old family album lacking identification.
)It takes a lot of energy and time to go through shelves and drawers, photos and folders of papers.
If you're like me with deceased parents who kept everything--you not only have your things to evaluate, but must read and double check theirs before recycling one scrap of paper.
Why?
Because, for example, my parents haven't been gone long enough for me to legally shred everything.My almost 98-year-old mil, Sr. Advisor R, on the other hand, (recently recovered from her broken hip), is conscientiously tossing or giving "stuff" weekly.
Her energy hasn't returned completely, but she is disciplined as I've written previously.
Says she doesn't want us to be stuck with it.When aging parents aren't mentally capable, it's another story.
But when they can do, if we didn't know how to help before, why not reread paragraphs 7, 8, and 9?
Hopefully we can adapt the concepts, help our aging parents, help ourselves, and perhaps even our children.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 28, 2011>
Tuesday's post presented today, Wednesday, June 29thDownsizing to help aging parents?
A sobering thought: in a way that might surprise you, it applies to us too.Personal experience: I've been writing about helping parents age well for about a year now on WordPress--hoping that sharing my unpublished book/manuscript with the world will, increase the number of older people who age well, as well as my parents did and my mother-in-law does.Rewind to last summer.
My parents had died, my then 96-year-old mother-in-law was aging well out west, and my husband and I were settled in our home of many years, enjoying our routines.
While some people were thinking of moving to Florida, thoughts of giving up our home didn't enter our minds.I'd joked about a city apartment being the best place to age well.
"When you're really ill, the doorman can call a taxi, dump you in the back seat," and tell the driver which ER to take you to," I'd laughingly say.
Then someone at the NY Times read my mind, I guess, and addressed the subject  http://helpparentsagewell.com/2010/07/page/2/ Then our 18-year-old feral cat died.
We took it for granted we could never move while she was alive--although loving and loyal, the "feral" in her would not allow her to age well in a new environment according to every veterinarian who had contact with her.Since I give careful thought to the ideas expressed in my posts.
Suddenly it occurred to me, why not at least look at apartments in NY City---for the future of course.
We were theoretically too young to have to move or even want to move.But moving--we are; and selling our home--the "For Sale" sign goes up this weekend.
I'll skip the details of apartment hunting and how we ended up with what could be a perfect apartment but needs serious renovation that I had no inclination to do....but am presently doing.Nevertheless, I want to talk about the major components of downsizing: Energy, Organization, Loss, Change as they impact aging parents and us.
And I will try to post a bit each night, since large swatches of time are currently in short supply.
Do check in.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 25, 2011>
When parents need us, we are there--if we can possibly manage it and are committed to helping them age well.
And so it is today, that a dear friend, Edie, was laid to rest in NY.
She was almost 101 years old and she did age well.
My day has slipped away from me and I will post on this blog tomorrow also.
But tonight I want to take a few minutes to write a bit about Edie--a fine, can-do, petite woman I knew through the Woman's Club--who I grew to love and admire over the years.
Then, using Edie's example, I want to add a bit about how family contributions help old/older people age well.
You may have met Edie in previous posts: quoted for her wisdom about old peoples' driving and cited for her always-in-order, stylish appearance among other things.
She was intelligent and well read, and her good eyesight enabled her to read, as well as write a note on a January letter to me (dictated to her daughter, who then printed it out so Edie could add the note) in her very legible, somewhat shaky, handwriting.While Edie lived here in NY all the time I knew her (with a daughter who has health issues and her daughter's husband), she was close to both daughters.
A year ago around Mother's Day, Edie's far-away-living Tennessee daughter came to NY to take Edie back to live the rest of her years with her and her husband--a mutually-agreed-to move, from what I can tell.The far-away Tennessee-living daughter is Edie's youngest.
She came to NY periodically.
On those trips she and Edie shopped for clothes at Talbots--one of Edie's favorite stores and obviously another option for clothes suitable for old women.
She also went to Edie's hairdresser's and left money to continue Edie's weekly hair appointments.We know how important hair is in looking "put together."
While clearly looks aren't everything, they are a major part of a first impression.
And Edie's first impression was yes old, but well-groomed and nicely dressed.
Additionally, the weekly hair appointment got Edie out of the house and into real life at the hair salon with all the gossip and friendly chatter that involves.Another plus was the fact that after she stopped driving at 90 something, another family member or friend drove her to the beauty salon each week.
More contact with others, more socialization, more stimulation--all of which as we know helps people age well.Once in Tennessee, Edie's younger daughter, a teacher, became caregiver during her nonscheduled working hours.
She arranged for someone to be at home with Edie during the day while at school.I'm sure many of us are familiar with the routine.
We put our life on hold until the end of a long day and then take care of our own responsibilities.
Papers needing to be graded awaited Edie's daughter at night.
So once the night was hers, she began another kind of work.
But she wouldn't have changed that for anything, she says.I began writing about old people and change in the last post.
While change is difficult for most old people, Edie seems to be an exception.
The fact that it was a mutually-agreed-upon change, was no doubt a big factor.
Edie also liked the gentler pace of Tennessee.While Edie lived with her NY daughter and husband for many years, we all knew about her yearly trips (in her 90's) to Tennessee as well as to Texas and California to see her grown grandchildren.
Shortly after arriving in Tennessee last summer, Edie's daughter and husband drove her to Texas to visit one granddaughter and her family.
More stimulation, more social contact.
"Can you imagine we're driving all the way to Texas?"
she wrote me.Edie's was a life well lived.
She was a member of that remarkable generation--widowed relatively young with two daughters, always upholding her end while moving everyone forward in the most graceful, positive way.
And her family happily gave back, which was almost unnecessary until she approached 100 and finally needed them.
What goes around, comes around.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 21, 2011>
"Old people don't adjust to change well," says an 85-year-old friend, talking about her long-time friend who completely recovered from a stroke, is once again living independently, but has changed from a woman of strength and determination to someone who acts relatively helpless...a woman whose "piercing intellect" has softened.
"Illness can change people," she continues, "I think it's the prospect of a change in their life--the prospect of not living life as they would like to.
Yes.
But that's just a piece.
According to our senior advisor, psychiatrist Dr.
Bud, "it's not just the 'prospect.'
It is change.
It's a loss....Body integrity is involved here and there's a need to make compromises due to the loss.
The loss itself can be a profound change and there may be fewer options to replace the loss (ie.
can no longer do daily exercises, walk any distance, play golf).....Anticipating loss in ourselves or in others isn't something we normally think about.
"So Dr.
Bud gives us another tool to help parents age well when we understand the profound effect of loss that can accompany change in older people.
We gain an important awareness that can increase our sensitivity and our ability to reach out and offer support.For example, Dr.
Bud says "it may be helpful to confirm that something is lost, but not everything."
Recognizing this may help a person to change--to reassess him or herself and his or her capacity for involvement in other things--or in doing things another way.
*                             *                               *                           *Throughout our lives we have heard about the importance of being a good listener.
Having someone to talk to, not necessarily to gain advice from, but having someone who actively listens in a caring way, provides its own feedback.When people of any age feel free to express uncertainties and feelings in a supportive, nonjudgmental, not-telling-you-what- you-should-or-shouldn't-do-environment, options often become evident, solutions can appear.
Clearly family members and friends, who are good listeners, play an important role in helping older people surmount the bumps in life that require changes.
And that has to help aging parents continue to age well.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 18, 2011>
Happy Father's DayThere's nothing better than making someone feel special and these cakes are truly works of art, aren't they?I am not a baker but I do think if Dad were alive, I might just get some of those sheets of marzipan, some food coloring, and--using a packaged mix--try the cake below.The cake at the top needs, I think, some kind of colored butter cream frosting in addition to the marzipan-- to make the sweater vest--which I would probably do in one color since it would still look nice and would only need one food coloring.
On second thought, possibly I would go to the extra trouble of making the cake at the top.
Dad would no doubt be wearing his sweater vest over a sport shirt--as he did every day, so Father's Day would probably be no exception and he would be "tickled" when he saw that cake.If inspired, you can Google many photos of Father's Day cakes, complete with recipes, and I'm guessing all are easier to make than the ones above.
So I'm including a link with photos and difficulty levels:http://www.wilton.com/ideas/browse.cfm?cel=Fathers-Day&cat=Cakes, should you be inspired.In the final analysis I think we know it's the warmth of being together that pleases parents most.With every good wish for a Happy Father's DayVisit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 14, 2011>
Fathers Day Cake made by EsperanzaThe cake should look familiar--from my last year's Father's Day post.
Today I'm rounding up gift ideas from my past posts and adding some.
Indeed I'm also adding some hidden agenda items that enhance aging parents' quality of life, designated **.
(You've probably thought about them but never had the courage to act.)
Since Father's Day is Sunday, here's the list--by categories--that should help us last-minute shoppers.Accessories/Clothing:Cane (measured correctly) or walking stick Hat (to shade a bald/potentially balding head) Sport shirt.
(Dad liked long sleeve ones to protect his arms from skin cancer--a definite concern as he aged.)
Sleeveless cardigan (not over the head) sweater vest.
Easier to get off and on if buttons aren't a problem.
Older people run cold.
Dad wore it at home.
It also looked good under a jacket when he went out.
(This style is hard to find.)
An easy-to-use umbrella--opens/closes with the push of a button.
Note: there has been a lot of rain this spring.
(Totes makes one.)
Computers--especially designed for seniors: Check the 6 options in my May post http://helpparentsagewell.com/2011/05/28/computers-especially-for-seniors/  .A-Plus Senior Computer Big Screen Live Eldy GO computer WOW computer Pzee computer   For the even less-technology-talented, check out Paw Paw and the Presto Printing Mailbox.
Entertainment:Magazine Subscription Netflix Subscription to newspaper--hometown, financial Tickets to sporting events etc.--accompany Dad or for Dad and a friend.
A short outing with Dad (fishing trip, golf game, movie, zoo, his old neighborhood if it's near--you might learn additional family history).
Health:Membership to the YMCA Membership to a gym Membership to Silver Sneakers A good blood pressure gauge may be a gift that helps parents age well, possibly recommended by doctor.
A great pair of shoes for walking **This medication reminder was featured in a local hospital's magazine, sent to seniors in surrounding communities.
http://www.guardianmedicalmonitoring.com/medication-management.asp.
Good idea for forgetful fathers (and mothers)?
Hearing:  Hearing loss in older people is a problem for everyone.
**Amplified Telephones=better conversations for all.
http://telephonesforhearingimpaired.com/  provides a quick education as does the  "Amplified Telephones" section of this U. of Calif at San Francisco Medical Center site:  http://www.ucsfhealth.org/education/hearing enhancement_devices/   Check this NY Times article:   http://gadgetwise.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/01/07/functions-to-make-phones-easier-for-the-elderly/ which mentions Clarity's phones, http://shop.clarityproducts.com/.Usually I pay little attention to company's emails sent to my blog's gmail, but because of the Times article--this interested me.
Click on the amplified phones picture for Clarity's offerings.
A few phones (which may or may not meet your parents needs) are on sale for Father's Day.
Google "telephones for hearing loss" for additional phone options.
**An appeal for an appointment with an audiologist (write a nice note) **Assistive listening systems: for TV watchers who need very high volume (http://www.hsdcstore.com/FAQs/DigitalTV.htm), while others in the room DON'T.
Educate yourself.
Scroll down to "Assistive Listening Devices."
PamperingStarbucks VIA ready brew individual instant coffee packets--regular or decaf in 3 or 12 packs for coffee lovers.
Microwave in mug.
Pricey.
Dad probably wouldn't buy it for himself.
A massage or a professional shave Vision: We know aging produces vision changes in many.Large print books (for dads who still like the feel of a book) The Kindle or other electronic book, where the font can be enlarged--a Godsend I hear The mini-maglite, small flashlights that give great light in dark places.
Pocket magnifying-glass takes up little space, is light weight, not pricey (less pricey at Staples), remains lit without having to keep a finger on any button, great for reading (menus/bills) in dark restaurants.
This is getting too long; will try to add to it tomorrow.
In the meantime, the "hidden agenda" part was inspired by an old event in my life.The first Christmas we were married, my husband gave me a gift he thought I should have (cookbook).
But then he had another gift for me that I really liked.
We still laugh about it.
But the additional gift made it very OK.  OK--you get it.Since helping parents age well is important, is there a gift that would enhance your dad's well-being?
Something he would have resisted if you suggested it, but probably won't refuse especially if it's combined with something he'd really like?
These are the ** gifts.
You can laugh with him if your "hidden agenda" is discovered.
But he will know your heart's in the right place.Also visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com   Same blog, more resources
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 11, 2011>
When aging parents can no longer do for themselves...If we agree that we are our parents' children; if we acknowledge parents' natural desire to have their children look up to them with respect, how do we reconcile a popular belief (or is it an attitude?)
that--when parents get to the point where they can no longer do for themselves and we must take over responsibilities similar to those of parents with young children--we become parents to our parents?Shortly after publication of her book, They're Your Parents Too, Francine Russo, spoke to a group in NY last year.
I asked her thoughts about being parents to our parents when they become dependent.
Her response was to the effect that feeding a parent isn't the same as feeding an infant.
The task may be the same; the relationship is entirely different.Do we see ourselves as parenting our spouse if he or she has disabilities or neurological problems that require us to do the caregiving dependent parents may require?
I think not.
With parents, as well with a spouse, isn't respect and upholding dignity an overarching aspect of the relationship?
Regardless of the situation or duties required of us, can that be ignored?A friend who instinctively does it right took care of her elderly father after surgery that left him temporarily incontinent.
Wanting to maintain her father's dignity and sensing his unease when she had to help with certain things she quipped "Dad, I've been married for a long time now--don't you think I've seen it before?
"I haven't forgotten her sharing this with me some time ago.
I remember thinking what an adult, respectful way to handle an awkward situation.Since we can't get inside people's heads to know how much they're processing (even when we may think "nothing,") can we take the risk of making a loved one feel like a child?
We may be devoting ourselves to help aging parents, we can feel weary, exhausted, and unappreciated.
But is it worth undoing it all if--even for a nanosecond--we make our parents feel diminished?I remember my mother at one point after her stroke saying something like "I took care of you as a child and now you're taking care of me."
I also remember my response (which I must admit to this day I'm happy to think I made).
It was something like "You're right,  Mom, and you know what--now it's payback time so don't give it a second thought.
"I do think when we help parents age well--or at least as well as possible--right up to the end, we have few--if any-- regrets.
And that's a gift we not only give our parents--but ourselves as well.Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com   Same blog, more resources
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, June 8, 2011>
...and/or do we remain their children foreverContributing factors are varied.
Let's look at the "children forever" part first:Back to Childhood: To help parents age well we need to keep in mind: "People change--not much."
I've often repeated this quote from the former head of human resources for a highly regarded Fortune 500 company.
As grown ups, we can look at our parents with fresh eyes if we try (it's perhaps easier when we live far away).See complete version on my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com       
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 7, 2011>
Now and then we have situations that put our lives on overload and since I can't make a 28-hour-day, I must put today's post on delay.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 4, 2011>
An October 10, 2010 Jane Brody column in the NY Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/26/health/26brody.html?_r=1&src=me&ref=general continues to be timely as she discusses age-related changes.
I was reminded of this column as I passed a former neighbor's home, where a garage sale was in progress.
I hadn't seen my former neighbor, Jane, since last fall, yet I had known  her well and watched her children grow up.
Her husband died prematurely and last fall she introduced me to an important man in her life, Pete.
He was moving here, she said, to be with her.
She shared that Pete was an only child; didn't want to leave his mother out west.
So although his mother was in her late 80's she too was moving here into a really nice apartment they had furnished for her, complete with her recently-shipped-out furniture.
I gently questioned about leaving friends, doctors, other supports behind and was told Pete's mother never went out, just sat home and watched TV, so it really didn't matter whether she was here or back home.
It was the same TV, the same furniture, only now she could be near her son plus Jane.
And they could both help her.
As I looked at the sale items neatly organized on the lawn and driveway I spotted a walker.
Since another neighbor was a partner in this garage sale I asked "who's walker was that?"
"Oh, that was Pete's mother's, she died a few months ago."
"I remember she was coming out here," I said.
"Yes, she came, but it turned out she had a lot wrong with her that we never knew about," Jane offered.
"She had congestive heart failure among other things.
I guess I should have realized.
During the years I've known her she stopped walking unless it was absolutely necessary.
She used to go into the market with us to shop, but made excuses to stay in the car the last few years.
And all she did was watch TV.
I realized her figure changed--I guess from so much sitting--her waist, hips, legs got bigger from sitting around and the congestive heart failure, I guess."
I offered my sympathy.
Jane Brody's column immediately came to mind.
We learn that lifestyle choices we make from midlife on can influence the damage from age-related changes and impact our functioning in late life.
Then a book by Mark Lachs, director of geriatrics at the New York-Presbyterian Healthcare System becomes the focus.
Dr. Lachs identifies two major influences (among others) that impact how well older people function and we learn that we start to deteriorate (my words) without realizing it at an early age.
Around age 30, for example, muscle strength begins its decline until we ultimately have muscle weakness.
While this doesn't impact healthy people until they're 80-90, lifestyle choices, whether we make them at 50 or 90, can allow us to postpone that rate of decline.
Dr. Lach writes, for example, that if you begin walking daily at age 45, you could delay immobility to 90+.
Conversely, immobility can impact a couch potato as early as 60.
Check out Jane Brody's column and check out Dr. Lach's book, Treat Me, Not My Age, (Viking) http://treatmenotmyage.com/.
Think I'll give his book to a 45-year-old friend; it could also be a Father's Day gift.
Older people may prefer advice from a book or, as I've often, mentioned "from their doctor" more than from us adult children.
If this book can help us and help our parents to age well--it's a win-win.
Check out my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com   More information--see tabs.
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, May 30, 2011>
Memorial Day is a time to remember that not all parents can age well.
Some give the ultimate sacrifice in times of war, leaving widows and children; others receive injuries that change their lives forever.Memorial Day, commemorating those who died in military service, was originally called Decoration Day.
Its early observance--on May 30th as a time to decorate the graves of war dead with flowers--came in 1868, 3 years after the Civil War.It was expanded to honor those who died in all American wars at the end of WWI.
And in 1971 Congress declared Memorial Day a national holiday, taking it from a 1-day holiday observance (unless it fell on a Friday or Monday making for a 3-day weekend) to a Monday observance that created the 3-day holiday weekend we observe today.
(For a full history click: http://www.military.com/memorial-day/)From the LLMilitaryWife's YouTube video http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N5KnRaoXTig&feature=youtu.be of this year's Memorial Day ceremonies at Flanders Field,...to the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific at Punchbowl in Honolulu: http://www.mypearlcity.com/story/community/message-editor-memorial-day-2011...to the reflections of a columnist for the Burlington (Vt.) Free Press,  http://www.burlingtonfreepress.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=2011105290314 ...and the personal experiences of a San Diego (CA) writer, http://www.sandiego.com/sports/memorial-day-2011-flags-friends-and-family we sample this weekend's thoughts and tributes.
Help Parents Age Well honors those who gave the ultimate sacrifice.This Post replaces Tuesday's regular post.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 28, 2011>
Special computers for seniors?
We know computers are a way of life for younger generations, but not for aging parents.
That's why my posts the last two weeks have focused on capable aging parents using a computer.
But we can't assume that computers not especially designed for seniors are suitable for aging parents and grandparents.
One size never fits all.
So today-- 6 computer options for seniors While I'm not in a position to rate them, I've added hopefully helpful comments.
Needless to say researching for the specifics that best match for your aging parents' or grandparents' capabilities and needs makes sense.
While clearly not all-inclusive, here are 6 options worth looking at: A-Plus Senior Computer: http://www.aplusseniorcomputer.com/?gclid=CNzX16fCi6kCFQcnbAodiyNAoA    Be certain to click "Questions."
Big Screen Live: http://bigscreenlive.com/.
"Software to turn a pc into an easy-to-use senior computer."
For details watch YouTube video: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ja_6VpxqUpc&feature=related.
Eldy: http://eldy.eu/ Begun in Europe, the free Eldy download for Windows, Linus, and Mac makes one's current computer senior-friendly.
According to the 12/29/10 post's sidebar, training is going on in the US.
Check it out!
GO Computer:  http://www.thegocomputer.com/, click "FAQ's."
The GO is sold through  firstStreet--a major catalog retailer for "boomers and beyond."
Rick's 2009 post,  http://helpmerick.com/computer-designed-for-seniors.htm, finds fault with GO's price and is instructive if you have patience to read the subsequent comments, about Eldy (then only available in Europe) and--for computer-savvy children-- about purchasing an inexpensive computer with a large screen then installing and customizing Ubuntu for senior parents.
I note firstStreet also sells the WOW!
computer: http://mywowcomputer.com/--it's for seniors and has a touch screen.
Pzee computer: http://www.pzeecomputer.com/ Click "Why Pzee" at screen bottom.
Father's Day is a few weeks away.
In our efforts to help aging parents, a senior-friendly computer could be a welcome gift--for older fathers and grandfathers as well.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com  Same blog, more information (see tabs).
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 20, 2011>
A Heads-Up Before Buying an iPad for Aging ParentsAt the Apple Store I asked for help selecting an iPad for an older person.
If you're thinking of gifting an aging parent with an iPad, keep the following (learned in response to my questions to the Apple person assigned to me) in mind.
You need to have a compatible computer in order to install iPad updates or trouble-shoot problems, according to him.
Phone support is also available--$79 for 2 years.
It doesn't seem to me that the iPad can substitute for your parents' computer.
In addition:1.
A compatible HP printer is necessary to be able to print something from the iPad.
The Apple Store sells the HP compatible models (least expensive is about $150).2.
Since the iPad is wireless it's necessary to bring wireless to the house/apartment if it isn't already there (and of course there's a monthly charge).
If cable has already been installed "it's probably OK."3.
The iPad comes in 2 models.
The 3G model has the capability of being used anywhere (and requires an independent contract with Verizon or AT&T, thus is more expensive).
If the iPad will be used primarily at home, no need for the 3G model.4.
A $69 keyboard is available for people who touch type and find the smooth surface of the iPad a difficult adjustment.5.
Because, as I understand it, it's necessary to have a compatible computer in order to install updates or trouble-shoot problems on the iPad, it may mean buying a new computer for your parents--probably a Mac.6.
Anyone who has changed from pc to Mac, knows it's an adjustment.
Older people usually find change more difficult.
I know it took me a while to feel comfortable when I made the change (even the vocabulary changes--ie.
"favorites" become "bookmarks") so being available to answer aging parents' questions and being supportive during the transition makes sense.Also, if you're considering an iPad for a Father's Day gift, you might double-check the questions I asked the Apple person who was assigned to me with the Apple person who is assigned to you.
And if you should get different information, please let me know.
After all-- we want to help aging parents, not give them more problemsTomorrow I'm visiting my 89-year-old friend.
Our goal: to make her a more comfortable, knowledgeable iPad user.Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com    More information on the tabs
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 19, 2011>
I had one of those moments the other day.
A former high school and college math teacher, now long-retired at 89 years of age, and I went out to lunch together.
We've been friends for years.
I knew she had been using a computer for years and assumed (Sr. Advisor 97-year-old R has said more times than I can remember "don't assume" and I guess that goes doubly for older people) she was quite computer literate.She began our luncheon conversation telling me how she was thrilled with the new iPad her children had given her--so light weight and fast and enlarging images on the screen is easy.
But she didn't know how to get my blog on it.
Said her son had showed her certain things, but not how to get to my blog.
So I asked a few questions:1.
How did she get to my blog on her old computer?
Answer: "I pushed the button, it was in my favorites."2.
I knew she e-mailed and asked what else she did on her computer?
Answer: "I look at pictures my children and grandchildren send me and I print some out."3.
"Anything else?"
I asked.
Answer: "I used to look up information but I don't any more."4.
"Do you write letters other than e-mail for people who don't have e-mail?"
I asked.
"No, I don't know how to do that.
And the other thing I don't know how to do is print anything out on my new iPad.
"This woman has a mathematical mind and in her day was an outstanding science student at one of the top colleges in the country.
She also  plays bridge and comes in first more times than I can count.
So I'm wondering why her computer usage is so limited.
I think I know the answer.
None of her children live near.
The closest lives a  4-hour drive away and he has responsibilities that make it difficult to get away."
He purchased the iPad (as a Mother's Day gift from him and his siblings) and set it up and I believe showed his mother some basics.
But then he had to go back home.
If you read Marti Weston's experiences with her dad and the iPad she bought him, you realize it takes more than one trip (see last Saturday's post) to help an aging parent really understand.I went to the Apple Store today after the workmen left and will summarize my iPod inquiry in an additional post I tomorrow.
In terms of helping aging parents, I think I get it now!
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com  Same blog, more information
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, May 18, 2011>
Sorry everyone.
Preparing to move has presented unforeseen tasks that--each day--seem to take up more time than I had realized.
I'm hoping to squeeze in the time I need to post tomorrow.As each day passes, I gain a greater appreciation of what it must be like--emotionally and physically-- for aging parents who must move from their home of decades.
While we have made the choice to move, I can imagine what it must be like for an older person who is moving out of necessity.
But that's a future post.I am anxious to write about computer and computer technology that seems to be well-suited for seniors--hopefully tomorrow.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, May 15, 2011>
There is no one answer to why some capable, aging parents don't use a computer--another resource that can help parents age well.
A few reasons were offered in the last post.
More recent questioning of older people elicited: Comfort Level Reasons1.
Older people are satisfied with things the way they are.
Why make problems if they're happy with the status quo?2.
They aren't interested in learning anything new.3.
Any initial interest in learning to use a computer is ultimately overruled by the necessity of disrupting one's comfort level (which includes concerns about being able to learn and about internet security).4.
When it involves "home," they don't want it "torn up."
Thoughts of making a hole in the wall for internet access is unnerving, whether in a home or in an apartment lacking internet accessibility.Financial Reasons1.
While the price of computers has clearly come down, they do cost money.2.
Installing internet access costs money.3.
Then there's the monthly charge for internet access.The above bears keeping in mind if you decide to plunge in and discuss getting a computer with your parents; as does the "keep it simple, stupid" rule.
If it's complicated, forget it.
Which brings us to computers recommended in past posts, but with a different twist.1.
Paw Paw http://pawpawmail.com/ The simplest technology-just email.
But it does connect seniors to the outside world.
A baby step towards the internet's capabilities.2.
A computer: Regardless of make or model, start simple.
Instruct how to E-mail, Google, Forward an e-mail, and Click on a forward, for example Live-Streaming (eg.
the previously suggested link:http://www.livestream.com/nytnestcam , where viewing the baby red-tailed hawk and its parents is addictive and educational),  or UTube http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jca_p_3FcWA&feature=related, where Susan Boyle's 1st audition is thrilling.
The latter two forwards highlight examples of the educational and musical potential.3.
The iPad: small, light-weight.
Teaching parents the basics above, and selecting a few appropriate apps, gets parents started.
Once again check out Marti Weston's blog and her 80-something-year-old dad's experience after she gifted him with an iPad:http://asourparentsage.net/2010/12/03/holiday-gift-buying-an-ipad-for-your-senior-parent/#more-5951.Father's Day is June 19th.
Yet there are other excuses to gift capable parents with a computer, internet access, and some of your time to teach some basics.
If siblings and others want to chip in, so much the better.
Once aging parents get thehang of it, won't they be entertained, connected, and possibly forever grateful?Also check out my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same blog, additional resources.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 14, 2011>
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, May 13, 2011>
So sorry, Everyone.
Could not sign in with a new post this week--until tonight.
Blogspot has had problems and I've been checking daily to see if I could sign in; but no luck until now.
As you realize if you read last Saturday's post I'm pretty sold on older parents having access to computer technology if they are mentally capable.
And you know the reasons if you read that post.
Tomorrow I will elaborate and make some suggestions for getting aging parents up an running on a computer.
Assuming Blogspot has no additional problems, I'll be back with you as we try to do it right in our efforts to help parents age well.
Susan PS  Do visit my other site:http:// helpparentsagewell.com.
It has been up and running without problems.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 7, 2011>
Is there a better Mother's Day gift than a new baby coming into the world?
Robin and Bobby, the red-tailed hawks that nested on the window ledge of the New York University's president's office, have one hatched baby as of this posting.
We've been watching the nest's goings-on for several weeks; indeed the eggs were expected to hatch several weeks ago and were declared no longer viable by some expert just a few days ago.
Meanwhile as the drama of an overdue birth continued, a small minority of tweets on the Twitter Chat suggested keeping the faith.
Faith has triumphed.
My April 20th blog suggested forwarding this and/or other live-streaming links to lift the spirits of aging parent parents (who have a computer) on dreary, rainy, days.
4800 viewers are watching the NY Times livestream as I post this.
If it's engaging them, think of the enjoyment for older parents who spend much time alone, with "time on their hands" (aka not a lot going on).
This is real, reality.
It's compelling, addictive and the tweets on the sidebar, while sometimes annoying, unveil viewers feelings.
So here's a Mother's Day gift--for aging mothers, aging fathers, and you too.
Happy Mother's Day from Robin and Bobby and the as-yet-unnamed chick.
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/07/nyregion/baby-hawks-death-exaggerated-timess-hawk-cam-shows.html PS.
There's more drama to come: will the 2 other eggs hatch and how well will the first chick survive?
Weeks more of viewing... A stimulating pass-time for parents in our effort to help them age well.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com--same blog, more information
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, May 5, 2011>
I'm sneaking in an extra post today--it's something I feel passionate about.I was at a Woman's Club program yesterday.
We had tea and desserts after the program, seated at tables for four.
The attendees were, at least, in their 60's--many in their 70's and 80's; some older.
Two of the women at my table were in their 80's, one was 90--all widows, bright, alert, and with-it.
Why would they need a computer?
Why should they have a computer?
One of the 80 something-year-olds said she used a computer when she worked, but never bought one after she retired.The subject underway when I joined the table was Bin Laden's killing by the Navy Seals.
One woman's brother was an Annapolis grad way back; her husband had been a veteran.
Another woman's husband was in the Pacific in WWII.
I asked if they knew anything about benefits for Veteran's and their widows.
Both women were clueless; their adult children should "check this out," they said, "but would they  know what to do" if I wrote down my blog "address" for them?That triggered thinking about the necessity of aging parents having and using a computer.
Even R, at 97, has said many times that if she'd known at age 80 that she was going to live this long, she would have gotten a computer and learned how to use it.That said, I have friends in their 60's and 70's who drive a car without hesitation but don't use a computer.
Some have one in the house (their husband's old one?)
and access e-mail--when they think about it.
For anything else, they ask their husband, adult children or grandchildren to do it.
Some smugly say they'd rather talk to a person on the phone; and/or they prefer to write a letter...."not as impersonal" they think.But isn't that unfair?
Unfair to impose on family members, and unfair to themselves because they miss out on a lot.
Some of my high school classmates have died.
Most of us hear by email.
Yet a close h.s.
friend who moved away "put her late husband's computer in a box" when she moved and proudly says she hasn't taken it out and doesn't plan to.
Friends can update her about news on the phone, she says.
They forget.
She's misses out.Studies confirm connections with others are an important factor in aging well.
Think connections, stimulation, exchanging information.
A computer makes it possible.This replaces my usual Saturday post.
I want to spend Saturday finding the simplest technology for using the internet and e-mail.
When older people have and use that technology, an important ingredient is added to their lives--an ingredient that helps them age well.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 3, 2011>
Barron's, "The Dow Jones Business and Financial Weekly," features "Reviews & Previews"--a 2-page spread each week.
The "Reviews" page features short business-oriented snip-its, so I was surprised to read the following, but not surprised by the following in a short column titled "The Numbers" (probably included because Mother's Day is this Sunday).
I share it with you.
"Senior Helpers, an in-home care provider, found that elderly moms prefer to live with their daughters over their sons.70%: share of mothers with both sexes of children who prefer to live with their daughters.94%: share of parents who want to live independently as they age68%: share of mothers who say daughters will take better care of them as they age80%: parents who say their children will care for them as well as they care for their parents.
"Do you find it surprising that elderly mothers would prefer to live with daughters rather than sons (who probably come with a wife aka "daughter-in-law")?
I don't.
However, I'm fortunate to be married to an only child.
His mother, R, is like a mother and she treats me like a daughter.
Yet--and this is not surprising either--98% of parents want to live independently as they age.
And this is true of R, who still lives in her home of 60+ years--actually is back, living independently in her home without help, after breaking her hip in late September and making an impressive recovery.
(Her recovery is the subject of a January 25, 2011 post.
)The fact that 68% of mothers say their daughters will take better care of them is also not surprising.
We typically think "women" when we think "caregivers" but many men--prefer (my dad insisted on) "male" when thinking "caregivers" for themselves.
Whether or not those "males" would include their sons is anyone's guess--probably depends on several factors including the son's wife.Lastly, isn't the 80% of parents who say their children will care for them as well as they care for their parents ambiguous as to quality of care?
Does that mean if they don't do a good job of caring for their parents, their children--likewise--won't do a good job of caring for them--or vice versa?It's a fact that parents are strong role models for their children.
And parents who help their aging parents are modeling this behavior for their children who, in turn, have better odds that they will help their parents as they age.
If we believe in role models, or if we believe "what goes around, comes around," it's all the more reason to help parents age well.Check out my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com--same blog, more information and resources
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 30, 2011>
                                    All three levels of Veteran's Benefits:  Healthcare (includes prescriptions), Service-Related,  Pensions (3 pension levels including Aid and Attendance)are discussed on blogger Dale Carter's March 5, 2011 Blogtalk radio interview.
Victoria Collier, a Vietnam Veteran, who's now an attorney specializing in elder law and veteran's benefits, is Dale's guest.While attorney Collier obviously can't cover everything in depth, there are 2 reasons I highly recommend taking the time to click the link below and listen to this half-hour program.
-- As an educator I know that while some of us are better visual learners, others are auditory learners who learn best by listening.
-- The Veteran's Aid and Attendance Pension Program is no secret to my readers, never-the-less attorney Collier brings up more helpful details in a half hour than one can include in a blog.
(We're told blogs won't hold readers' attention that long....surprise, surprise.
)Since our goal is to help parents age well--during the good times and during the challenges, if there's a veteran in your family--especially an aging one--check out Dale Carter's interview.
It's such a good one--packed with information that can help parents (and grandparents), who are veterans, age well.....And who knows, this might just turn into a life-changing present for Mother's Day....or Father's Day.http://www.blogtalkradio.com/dalec/2011/03/15/veterans-benefits-for-your-aging-parents
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 26, 2011>
Mother's Day crept up on me this year.
Suddenly it's less than two weeks away...actually too late for one of the best Mother's Day gift ideas--but perhaps not too late if you're creative.I've never seen this handbag in the East....maybe because it comes from California.
But I've seen it in the West and grandmothers who have it, love it.
They should because it's pricey.
(Yet we all know--everything pricey isn't loved by everyone).
At least one grandmother says it's "a thrilling gift to receive...I don't think any mother or grandmother would appreciate anything more."
She has the "Vanessa."
What makes it so special?It's a Brighton handbag, with a photo expertly reproduced on the back and front-- a wonderful conversation piece of excellent quality...."sturdy," I'm told.If you want to get it for Mother's Day, I'd like to suggest downloading a picture of the handbag and putting it in a Mother's Day Card.
After all, looking forward to something is half the fun and the photo won't be revealed until the handbag is unwrapped.
When several people go in on the gift, needless to say, it becomes more affordable.
Click the link.
http://www.brightoncollections.com/products.php?CatID=1&TypeID=61.There's a phone number to call for specifics.
You'll learn how to send the photo (which needs to be 4x6 horizontal) and when the gift will arrive.
While I love the handbag with the family dog, I'm guessing grandchildren usually win out.The second pricey gift: the iPad.
An 88-year-old with macular degeneration received one as a birthday gift last weekend and says she loves it because she can enlarge the font to read books as well as the apps (some of which her children installed for her).
This makes reading a so much better for her.
(I understand her kids went to the Apple store at 7:30 in the morning and there was already a long line.
)A less pricey gift: the Kindle.
Again the size of the font can be enlarged which helps people with macular degeneration as well as others.
While the Kindle is not as versatile as the iPad since it's made for reading books, it does help many aging parents to enjoy reading once again.I will update previous posts featuring Mother's Day gifts on Saturday.
In the meantime, feel free to search them on my blog.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com--same blog, tabs, and more information
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 23, 2011>
Another dreary, rainy day in the northeast--the day before Easter, a time when we expect Spring weather to lift our spirits.
For me it's cozy--rain pattering on the roof; my husband at home; and each of us is doing what we want with few "must do's" until we meet friends for dinner tonight.Then I think about the older people who live alone on dreary days.
My neighbor, with a husband, 5 adult children and umpteen grandchildren, is prepared for this kind of day.
She has looked out for an independently-living 90+ year-old childless (and as I understand it "remarkable") aunt for 10 years...through the good times and some major health events.Idea #1: a movie on a rainy dayEvery weekend my neighbor visits her aunt, bringing a film from Netflix.
What's better than watching a movie on a dreary day?
Sometimes it's an old movie, featuring stars of her aunt's era; sometimes it's a current film.
She and her aunt watch together and often have a snack as if they were at the movies.
It's something her aunt looks forward to and a responsibility my friend feels blessed to be able to do.Idea #2: Live-streaming Forwards on a dreary dayWe all receive forwards.
They can bring music, video, and interest to aging parents who use computers and know how to click the link.
Connecting with nature is uplifting and regenerating, so watching the live-streaming below should capture older people's interest:1.
The 24/7 (special light that doesn't disturb birds, they say) live-stream video of an eagle pair and their 3 little eaglets.
Who doesn't love watching babies?2.
The NY Times live stream of red-tailed hawks, Violet and Bobby, on their nest, waiting for their eggs to hatch--any day now.
It's mesmerizing.
One person called it "a zen-like experience."
The fact that the nest sits on the window ledge of New York University's President's office--smack dab in the middle of the big city--attests to the hawks' resourcefulness.
Excellent technology makes this live-stream close and personal--actually, I think, addictive.Idea #3: Links on a blah dayLinks such as YouTube add entertainment to aging parents' lives.
Our lives are busy and, speaking for myself, there's precious little time to watch and appreciate everything that's forwarded.
But there are elders who aren't busy, who don't have much going on, who feel down on dreary days.
Selected entertainment can be a "pick-me-up.
"As we look for ways to help parents age well when those dreary days dampen spirits, why not give these ideas a try?With hopes that one of the red-tailed hawk's eggs hatches soon.......  Visit my other site:helpparentsagewell.com  Same blog, more information   
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 19, 2011>
"I just got my new cell  phone, and it's one that I  can understand, outsmart, and know how  to operate!!!
I got it at  the Verizon Cell Phone for Seniors store at the mall!"
This email was forwarded to me by a friend following my telephone posts of April 9 and 12.
(Love it when people send ideas for my blog.)
I did some research but am also anxiously waiting to hear from the originator of the forwarded email above.
I'm want to know exactly which cell phone has empowered her.
What is the best cell phone for aging parents?
I thought PC magazine might have the answer.
Its three-page article "The Top Simple Cell Phones"  (Feb. 2011) offers excellent information in text, plus ratings and a slide show of seven phones.
I knew Jitterbug (third page) was senior-user-friendly, but had little knowledge about the other cell phones.
Another review of cell phones for seniors,http://reviews.cnet.com/cell-phones-for-seniors/, (updated April 2011) lists only one phone on PC Magazine's list: Doro Phone Easy 410.
The comments at the end from adult children purchasing cell phones for parents and grandparents offer an additional perspective.
I was completely clueless about Verizon Senior Stores.
Google and Yahoo are always a first line of research for me and I found several Verizon Senior Stores are located somewhat near me.
While three stores had ratings and comments, the sample of respondents is too small to be valid by any research standards.
Yet some stores appear to be more senior client-centered than others.
There were rave reviews, for example, about a certain saleswoman at one of the Verizon Senior Stores, while some people complained about service at other stores.
Cell phones are a real convenience and can obviously save lives in an emergency.
Check out the offerings.
Clearly a user-friendly cell phone is a necessity as we try to help parents and older people age well.
The right cell phone encourages connections, is a practical gift, and will hopefully empower older people just as it empowered the writer of the forwarded email that began this post.
And what was this cell phone that she could understand, outsmart and know how to operate with such enthusiasm?
I promise to post the name as soon as I hear from her.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com   Same blog, more tabs and information 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 16, 2011>
Are We Brave Enough to Question a Doctor?
Reaching old age in relatively healthy condition involves many things.
Along the way, there are the inevitable health issues that may require hospitalization.I also think it's safe to say that most of us just naturally want to please our parents' doctors or at least not get on their bad side.
We want to collaborate, not seem critical or questioning.
But sometimes.........While it's not uncommon to feel stressed just thinking about having a difficult conversation, especially one that involves someone in authority, it can be more daunting when we feel we must have this kind of conversation with our parents' doctor or other health workers who care for our parents.
*                         *                     *                        *                       *Maureen Dowd tackled this issue in her  April 13, 2011 NY Times column, informing us that--among other things-- "A report in the April issue of Health Affairs indicated that one out of every three people suffer a mistake during a hospital stay.
"For those of us trying to help parents, older people or anyone age well, I think this column really is a "must-read," especially if a hospital stay is imminent or might be in their future.Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com   Same blog, more tabs and information
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 12, 2011>
When Aging Parents Move and We Try to Help--Telephones!
Will Our Telephone # Move Too?
Unlike our cell numbers, hard-wired telephone numbers don't necessarily follow to a new residence--even when it's not very far from the previous residence.
For aging parents, telephone numbers need to follow from the "get-go."Obvious?
Perhaps.
Under stressful conditions--perhaps not.Unintended consequences, are just that.
We don't think about them until we're left with the damage control.
And if we're responsible as we try to help aging parents, it's easy to become angry with ourselves for creating an additional problem that disappoints parents and can unnecessarily involve siblings.BackgroundAn 85-year-old relative recently moved from her condo to assisted living--not a move she initiated.
Several months of worsening mobility problems and a series of hospitalizations jeopardized living alone.The last several years she and her 3 grown children had discussed the wisdom of moving.
Friends in her condo complex had died or moved.
And there was an attractive independent-living place nearby, making it easy to maintain her routines.My relative is smart, organized, active, loved her condo of 40+ years and hung on to her independence--through many serious health events.
But last month her doctors advised she needed assisted--not independent--living.
She gave in and asked her children to arrange for the move while she recovered in a hospital.What's a telephone got to do with it?To reiterate from past posts, connections to others is one of the 3 most important factors in healthy aging.
And telephones provide a major way of connecting with others.
Indeed older people may have their friends' numbers on automatic dial as memories fade.My relative's caring, efficient children notified the phone company to close her account immediately.
It was an easy thing to cross off a long list.
But then they realized she was issued a new phone number at the assisted-living facility, which had another provider.
Friends couldn't contact her.Think about new phone numbers being a problem for aging parents and grandparents who downsize (and for their aging/old friends).
If they remain in the same area of their city/town and stay with the same phone company it's more likely that the phone number won't change.
Simply tell the phone company that although the address is changing, your parents want to keep the same #.1.
However, do not notify the phone company to stop an aging/old parent's existing phone service before asking if they can transfer the old telephone number to the new address.Otherwise the existing phone number can be given away.2.
Check out--ahead-- the phone system/provider at the new place.
When an institution has its own system or a different phone provider, it may be best to ask the person in charge to take care of having your parents' old phone number transferred immediately if it's doable.
This eliminates having aging parents who just changed living situations feel even more isolated because friends can't phone them.My relative's children report it was a hassle to get the old phone number back--took 3 weeks to accomplish.
"We were just lucky," they added.
(It may not be this difficult everywhere.
)It was simpler back in the day, when "Reach out and touch someone" was a well-known saying; when accessing a live human being on the other end of a business's line was the norm.
Never-the-less we can prevent unintended consequences and, in the case of telephones, maintain that connectedness so important for older people's aging well.
It doesn't take too much effort...when we know how.Visit my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com   Same blog, more information    
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 9, 2011>
Automation, Confusing Menus, "On Hold" Forever, Can You Talk to Real People?
To help older people age well, we know how important it is to stay connected.
Face-to-face is great; phones are next best.
That said, making a phone call to get information, check billing status etc.
is no longer simple.
Today's automated technology can frustrate and discourage older people, undermining feelings of self-reliance--increasing their dependence on adult children to handle "stuff" for them.
Does this help parents age well?Telephoning to Get Information--Complicated  Haven't we all experienced it --first the menu, next a series of instructions, then often a long hold which clearly the machine doesn't mind--but what about us humans on the other end!
?For older generations who spent most of their life talking to a person, being subjected to a menu of endless, seemingly unsuitable or quickly-forgotten options is frustrating and confusing... No doubt even worse for those with some hearing or memory loss.Help Has Arrived  The Ask The Experts column in AARP's March 2011 bulletin provides it.
(Click link and maximize to see column in readable-size font.)
"How can I quickly reach a live person when calling a customer service number?"
is the third (and last) question in the column.
AARP's Experts introduce three .
coms that come to the rescue.
With companies' customer service numbers (answered by human beings) and the "how-to's" of bypassing automated prompts to reach live representatives, there is help for aging parents....and us.
1.
DialAHuman.com provides a long, alphabetized list of companies' phone numbers where human beings answer the call.
I clicked the link; be certain to scroll to the very end for 8 additional suggestions about bypassing prompts and reaching a human being.
2.
GetHuman.com displays a list of popular companies' phone numbers, a long alphabetical list of companies, or you can type in a company's name.
You'll be able to see average wait time, user reviews, customer satisfaction ratings for phone accessibility among other things.
3.
LucyPhone.com prevents you from being placed on "hold" and is another free service.
Clicking the link brings up the simple-to-follow instructions.
Interesting details in this NY Times Business Section article.
The above should help aging parents who use computers.
For those who don't, we can print out a list of company phone numbers our parents often use (where humans answer the phone), along with the 8 suggestions found on DialAHuman.com.
And--oh, yes, won't this information help us too?
*                       *                        *                         *                          *Do you know your parents' long-standing phone number may be taken away if/when they downsize but remain in the same town?
This coming Tuesday's post elaborates.
Check out my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com--same blog, more information in tabs 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 5, 2011>
Holiday Thoughtfulness and Aging ParentsA small bunny peaks out from under a flowered hat at bottom left of this gift basket, made by my friend.
Wouldn't it bring joy to an aging parent or to a senior in a care facility?2011   Passover: April 18th-26th      Easter: April 24thWe celebrate miracles: The emancipation of the Israelites from slavery in ancient Egypt, and the Exodus when the Red Sea parted.
The Resurrection of Christ after the Crucifixion.
Older generations fondly recall traditions that brought family members together: Passover with Seders and children looking for the hidden matzo; Easter with church services, children's Easter egg hunts, and a special Easter meal.
The timing of Passover and Easter are inextricably linked.
The Last Supper was a Passover Sedar.Holidays evoke warmth of family, feelings of togetherness.
Yet we know holidays can be depressing for older people living alone, without children to visit or invitations to partake in family celebrations.
On the other hand, opportunities for bringing pleasure to old and/or lonely people during Easter and Passover are many:Attending Easter services together, then......dining at a place with beautiful surroundings that make the outing special...going to a restaurant in town where aging parents who don't get out much can take a short walk (walker?
wheelchair?
), window shop, enjoy seeing normal activity...having a meal at home with family--togetherness, conversation, participation ...When the Easter meal is at home and elders want to help, accept the offer.
We know how good it feels to contribute.Ditto for Passover.
One of our Senior Advisors says proudly that she made: chopped liver, matzo balls, gefilte fish, and horseradish for the Seder.
Not easy at 89.
She says she was able "to work it out so I could make everything ahead."
And best of all perhaps for her, "It was a good feeling because everyone wanted to take some home and there wasn't anything left.
"Passover Sedars follow a prescribed ritual-- usually at home with family and often invited guests.
Yet there were no children to look for the traditional hidden matzo at a Sedar on the West Coast last year.
What to do?
Creative thinking perpetuated the tradition.The oldest guests were sent on the hunt.
And an excited 86-year-old found the matzo.
While not traditional, life today with children and grandchildren living near is not the same as in times past.
Adapting is the name of the game for holidays (and so much else).And last but not least, what about the frail, isolated elderly who can't get out easily?
A visit is welcome and bringing little gifts, while unnecessary, is always a pick-me-up.
Suggestions:Bring... a little lunch or snack ("nothing big," I'm told) to share while you talk (consider dietary restrictions if known)... a few holiday decorated cookies or cupcakes...an easy-care living plant--possibilities: (philodendron [sweetheart plant], fern [nephrolepis], spathiphyllum [peace lilly--wallisi variety] or kalanchoe)...a flowering plant for a sunny indoor spot or patio...flowers...Allergies a problem, what about a basket like the one above?Easter and Passover celebrate miracles.
While we can't make miracles, planning ahead and giving older people something to look forward to is an additional gift--a gift that contributes to helping parents and elders age well, especially during holidays.
Visit my other site--  http:helpparentsagewell.com    Much more information on tabs
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 2, 2011>
I was invited to write a guest blog for EPOCH Senior Living (EPOCH offers levels of living and care for seniors); and while I write few guest blogs, I liked the idea of this one.
It was interesting to relate the new guidelines--which make sense in theory--to practice (the experience of a few older people I know).
What follows comes  from my blog post for EPOCH's blog.AGS/BGS Guidelines should lessen falls among the elderly.
Yet they wouldn't have helped my husband's "with-it," 97-year-old mother, R, (the subject of my January "falling, broken hip, complete recovery" posts).When R fell, her health was very good (no heart, high blood pressure, etc.
problems).
She ate healthy, took calcium citrate+D, exercised and walked daily on a non-electric 1960's treadmill, powered by her feet.Guideline's-recommended Tai chi--confirmed in countless reputable studies to improve balance and help prevent falls, and now offered at many senior centers--may have prevented R's fall.I attended a class at our local senior center several years ago.
Coincidently, the abrupt twist that caused R's fall was one focus of that class--practicing a gentle turn of legs and body, as opposed to twisting part of the body, which disturbs balance.
(Isn't that what we instinctively do, for instance, when a phone or doorbell rings unexpectedly?
)That said, driving to regular exercise classes is impossible for non-driving seniors like R.  Obviously many needy seniors without transportation miss out on tai chi and other exercise classes.Because faulty vision can cause falls, in addition to regular vision check-ups , at least one New York U.
Medical School faculty doctor recommends that his elderly patients have a night--light in their bedroom, especially if they read/work in bed and throw those materials on the floor before going to sleep.
"I warn older patients they can easily slip and break a bone (as some have) if they get up in the middle of the night and don't see them."One sensible Guideline--"Evaluation for gait and balance" by doctor after one fall--may be easier said than done.
Falls are often kept secret.
An 87-year-old had many falls before one caused a broken hip.
Her doctors discovered an imbalance that a simple device in one shoe remedied.
Had she not been so secretive, after the first fall, her broken hip could have been prevented.
The new assessment "examination of feet and footwear" didn't exist then.
It might have prevented her falls in the first place.An alert pendant/bracelet, while not preventing falls, would have saved R additional pain, from pulling her body 30 yards over 3 hours to a phone.
Her badly bruised knees healed more slowly than her hip.
How many seniors have, but don't wear, those pendants?
R never thought she'd need one because she took such good care of herself.
Doesn't it make sense for elderly people, living alone, to have one?
(Click link for some researched options.
)Denial, keeping falls secret, and transportation difficulties can undermine even the best fall prevention efforts.
We have the Guidelines, we know some of the problems, now it would seem that the challenge is for seniors' doctors, rational older people and their children to embrace them.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 29, 2011>
Wilco  ....A continuation of last Saturday's post, with concepts and strategies to help aging parents and adult children untangle a frustrating relationship.
Concept #3  Tolerating disrespect, reinforces it.
Allowing disrespectful behavior helps no one.
We learn this from day one if we're teachers.
When there's a bully in the classroom (to use a dramatic example), we must use our skills to stop the bullying immediately.
Why?
If the bully is allowed to continue, the bad behavior is reinforced to the point that it becomes part of the bully's "normal" behavior--and eventually becomes expected behavior.
The bully becomes unpopular to most and his/her "victims" suffer.
Teachers may be understanding and caring; but they can't allow disrespect.
O.K.
You get it.
Now back to Jean (featured in Saturday's post).
Jean shared her situation with one of our Senior Advisors over a period of time.
Our Senior Advisor's response to her: "You're not in good spirits any more, you're not happy.
You have a husband and a family.
I know you've said you'd feel guilty not doing for your parents like you've been doing.
But when you're not respected, you don't have to feel guilt." Hearing this from a respected older person whose wisdom Jean highly valued was affirming.
It was also the equivalent of supportive ammunition and Jean "got it."
So Jean is slowly disengaging.
She doesn't jump to fulfill her parents' wishes.
She no longer says she's available at every request to drive them; she doesn't cut off a phone conversation with friends when her parents call on the other line.
While she still does for them, she's not at their beck and call.
The result: Her mother didn't fire the last cleaning person, in fact she's enjoying having the cleaning person around, according to Jean.
And some of the errands Jean used to do are now taken over by her brothers or sister-in-laws, all of whom get along well.
Vector Concept #4.
The family is like a mobile.I learned a bit about "family systems" through experts' presentations as part of inservice training during my years at the high school.
The "family as a mobile" concept helped explain many things.
Note how the beautifully-made mobiles hang in perfect balance.
Similarly each family member must do his or her part to keep the family functioning in balance.
If one member is aggressive, for example, another must pull back to maintain the balance.
While one is ill, another takes over some of the responsibilities temporarily.
In a divorce, absent one parent, the remaining family members must do extra to make things work.
(One of the most respected researchers in the field reported "even 8-year-olds can vacuum.")
True to the concept, Jean gave up some of her formerly must-do responsibilities and her aging parents readjusted, bringing in others to maintain the balance.
*                        *                           *                              *                          *People's personalities don't change much (short of trauma or therapy) and things will probably never be perfect, yet Jean is relieved of guilt, some responsibilities, and has more time for herself and for her family.
Meanwhile her parents have learned that they can no longer depend on her so heavily but can take the initiative to make their lives work.
Doesn't this help parents age well?
Quiet Ending  With many thanks to Rick for permitting me to use these photos of his mobiles.
Visit his website,http://www.the-mobile-factory.com/mobiles.htmlto view more of his exciting workAlso visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com.
More resources and information
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 26, 2011>
Aging parents' dispositions can be put on a bell curve: pleasure-producing dispositions at one end, pain-producing at the other.
Unfortunately pain-producing is the norm for some aging parents.
They are demanding, critical, never satisfied.
Adult children living near-by usually bear the brunt of this no-win situation which seems to offer no easy way out.While changing behavior is difficult, understanding the concepts below can help aging parents and adult children untangle themselves:1.
Back to childhood.2.
Families cater to the most neurotic members.3.
Tolerating disrespect, reinforces it.4.
The family is like a mobile.We begin with Concepts #1 and #2 and conclude on Tuesday with Concepts #3 and #4.
But first meet Jean.Jean is a stay-at-home mom in her 50's.
She's married, with two school-age children, two siblings--and an aging mother and father-in-law who "run her ragged" and show no appreciation.
Her brothers work in downtown offices thus, are unavailable on weekdays; so parents "know" the boys are "off limits" (although they do help out on weekends when asked).Being a good daughter, on a weekly basis, Jean has transported these parents (who drive but sometimes "don't feel like it"), cleaned (they manage to fire every cleaning person Jean finds for them), and she spends countless hours on the phone with them (they phone daily--at the least--when they have nothing else to do).
Jean cooks and delivers meals--or invites them to dinner--when they don't feel like cooking, takes them to doctors' appointments and lays out and explains their medications (which they don't always take).She's at their beck and call, wearing herself to a frazzle as she dashes between Little League, swim meets, music lessons, grocery shopping, house cleaning, dinner fixing etc.
etc.
Her husband, most patient and caring, is showing a bit of resentment.
Jean's parents are relatively young and he envisions this situation going on forever.#1.
Back to childhood.
Parents and children establish patterns of behavior way back; it's difficult to break old patterns.
If children were always expected to cater to their parents, the pattern--the game so to speak--has been well established.
The parents are accustomed to being catered to by their children.
Those are--and have been--the game rules over many years, evidently never renegotiated.In addition, children, regardless of age, are always their parents' children.
(Many disagree with adult children saying they become parents to their parents--I'm one, but that's another post.)
It's common for children to want to please parents.
And they usually feel responsibility if catering to a parent was an expectation or a duty from early on.#2.
Years ago, while doing research for my divorce book, a priest told me that families cater to the most neurotic member, something he had learned this during training in social work.
Undoubtedly some impossible parents are/were neurotic and have experienced a lifetime of being catered to.We try to help parents age well.
It involves helping them to maintain legitimate independence and, in this case, involves extricating their adult children from a difficult, thankless, possibly manipulative situation.
Tuesday's post, with concepts #3 and #4, provides understandings and strategies to make this happen.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com     More resources and information
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 22, 2011>
I read the cover story, "What Doctors Wish Their Patients Knew," in the March 11, 2010 Consumer Reports magazine with interest and an eye towards helping aging parents.
It's excerpted in the above link; the additional major points follow: 1.
The  importance of the long-term doctor-patient relationship.
Research suggests patients who frequently switch doctors have more health problems and spend more on care than patients who stay with one doctor.2.
The importance of following--and being able to follow--doctors' advice or treatment recommendations.
Patients need to  feel comfortable expressing any doubts or concerns to doctors about treatment, side effects or other health-related issues.3.
The importance of keeping a diary or log of treatments, medications, tests, procedure, health issues.
Interestingly, in this age of electronic medical records, we learn that 89% of the doctors interviewed in Consumer Reports want patients to know "that it pays to keep track of your medical history."4.
Two people remember things better than one.
In addition, a person who isn't feeling well may not have the best judgment, thus going to a doctor's appointment with someone is recommended.
Can't we conclude, then, that it's helpful when an adult child (or a friend or relative) accompanies aging parents to doctors' appointments (assuming parents don't mind)?5.
Time with the doctor is precious, so coming to the appointment with questions written down and prioritized makes the most of the time allotted.
I found faxing questions ahead of an appointment saved precious time after mother had her stroke and we went for follow-up appointments.
You might ask if emailing is preferred.There's an additional piece connected to "What Doctors Wish Their Patients Knew"-- "Finding Dr.
Right," copied in its entirety in the above link.As we try to help parents age well, finding the right doctor can make all the difference.
I continue to be an advocate of geriatricians for older people.
Geriatricians have a specialty in geriatrics and treat patients 65 and older.
They work with primary care physicians; an older person need not give up his/her primary care doctor.
If you're unfamiliar with geriatricians, here's a link to a previous post:http://helpparentsagewell.com/2010/09/13/update-on-best-hospitals-geriatric-division-visit/.
I think Karen's letter at the end says it all.And visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com for more information and resources 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 19, 2011>
Help Older People Age Well in Spring: 6 Ideas1.
A big help, especially for older people who live in one of the 47 states that go on Daylight Savings Time and find technology difficult: checking that allclocks were set ahead last weekend and if not, offering to set them.
Ditto for those clocks (ie.
a clock up on a wall in the kitchen) that require ladders to reach the mechanisms.2.
Especially in states that have bad winters, spring brings thoughts of nature, and gardening, and opportunities for thoughtful acts that bring happiness to older people.
Ideas: gifting a new pair of gardening gloves, seed packets, a flowering outdoor plant (primrose perhaps) for a temporary indoor touch of spring; or a flowering indoor plant that blooms year-round such as  Oxalis (Lucky Shamrock).
It's in stores now because of St. Patrick's day.
What about gifting a bird feeder or bag of bird or thistle seeds in climates where bird feeding continues for a while; or helping to clean up the yard and flower beds (or sending a grandchild to help)?
Gardening help may be a big job, but doing something together with children and grandchildren is a gift in itself for aging parents.3.
More sun and warmer days make getting out easier.
The Philadelphia Flower Show ended last weekend, but the New York Botanical Garden'sOrchid Show continues through April 25th.
Friends said it's the most beautiful ever.
I agree.
A large parking lot is set aside for handicap-stickered cars.
The Conservatory is a bit of a walk, but on a nice day wheel chairs make access easy (didn't see any walkers).
Check out Orchid show link above.4.
While flower shows seem to be more popular with older people (many older men and women at the Orchid Show and Philadelphia Flower Show), regional events, that include flower shows, are another option for aging/older parents.
Examples: http://www.ncazaleafestival.org/ (N.C);  http://www.sfgardenshow.com/ (in San Mateo, Calif.);  http://www.yankeemagazine.com/issues/2011-03/features/spring-festivals/all ("everything" coming up in New England, courtesy Yankeemagazine).
Check local papers for big events as well as the small garden clubs' flower shows.5.
Spring brings the beginning of baseball season.
Taking aging parents to a game--be it major or minor league or grandchildrens' games--is a wonderful outing in nice weather, especially for baseball fans.
Busy mothers and fathers often try to get to the last innings of a game, even if they can't make the beginning.
This may be a perfect time-frame for aging parents who tire easily.6.
Unusual entertainment: if you read this blog by--or on--March 20th, the vernal equinox--the first day of spring, at around 7:21 pm EDT, day and night are about equal in length.
Due to gravity forces you should be able to make an uncooked egg stand straight up!
And that's our last idea for "Spring's Little Things."
They help parents age well by adding something fun, thoughtful, enriching, different--happiness to their lives.Tomorrow I hope to have an egg-standing-on-end photo right here!
And here it is 3/20/11!
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com Same blog, additional resources
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 15, 2011>
My friend and former colleague (in her mid-80's), who sent the NY Times Science section piece on Happiness (last Saturday's post), also wrote me the following last summer:"The other day I was struggling to express to you that older people who are free of pain can experience an almost euphoric delight in small treats.Time goes so quickly, with most of the day absorbed by maintenance activities, like dressing and doctor-visiting, that the few moments of pleasure assume great importance and intensity.
Perhaps the absence of a future, with its attendant worries and burdens, serves to intensify delight in the moment.
"What are "small treats," the little things that help aging parents experience "an almost euphoric delight?"
They are, no doubt, the unexpected and thoughtful, or planned and thoughtful, often simple acts of caring.For example, when picking up Sr. Advisor, R, to drive her to physical therapy a few days ago, sitting on her kitchen table I noticed--at the moment R began to tell me about--two beautiful clear containers of yellow roses and daffodils with slices of lemon floating around the stems, plus a pretty, yellow, opened box of home-made pastries.
A bright yellow and white ribbon lay near.The flowers were recycled from a dinner party one of R's neighbors had attended; the pastries were baked by another neighbor, who loves to bake.
Each gift, an unexpected small treat--conveying caring and thoughtfulness.You could see R's delight as she talked about them and the women who brought them over to her home.
While she is always gracious and appreciative that I drive 25 miles to take her to rehab 10 minutes away, the little things--the small unexpected treats--give more of a "lift.
"Similarly asking older people ahead of time if we can take them grocery shopping/to a movie/lunch-- or come for a visit or go on a short walk with us--gives them something to look forward to.
The "little"--the frosting in this case, is the thoughtfulness of asking ahead.
It's something to look forward to.
The "thing" itself is the cake.Can we think of  "little things/small treats" that add happiness to an older person's life?
Flowers from the yard?
Something to eat?
Flavored water?
The often-forgotten Root beer or Ginger Ale of one's youth?
Or that wide rubber band that makes opening a jar easy?
(See 12/7/10 post:"When No Big Deal Means a Great Deal.")
If something at the store is 3 Whatevers for $5, why not get 3 and give one to an older person who would enjoy it?
As we try to help parents and older people age well, the possibilities for adding happiness by treating them to thoughtful "little things" is limitless.
Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com--same blog post, meet my Sr. Advisors, check sites and blogs I like and more.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 12, 2011>
A former colleague who retired shortly after I began my counseling career has been a mentor and good friend over many decades.
In her mid-80's, she is both an aging parent and a parent who has aged well.
A former revered English teacher, she reads widely, writes beautifully, and offers blog ideas from time to time.On a day when Japan is mired in devastation from the earthquake, the northwest is being pounded by heavy rains, parts of New Jersey are still under feet of water, and a terrible bus accident has closed a highway near me, my friend's contribution, "HAPPINESS MAY COME WITH AGE" (June 1, 2010 NY Times Science Section), seems like an uplifting theme--especially because the subject is old/older people.While "aging" and "growing old" usually connote a not-to-be-looked-forward-to, less-happy-than-younger-people stage of life, the results of a large Gallup poll, reported in the Times, seem to fly in the face of this reality.
The poll's 2008 telephone survey of 340,000 people age 18-85 found that people 85-year-olds are happier than 50-year-olds!My friend emails me this link.
Check it out and note that the findings are respected by researchers in the field.
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/01/health/research/01happy.htmlDefinitely it's food for thought as we try to understand and help aging parents and relate to older people in general.
Now I wonder--Can we take heart in the fact that "stress declines from age 22 onward, reaching its lowest point at 85" and "worry stays fairly steady until 50, then sharply drops off?"
And what about the other findings?
This recent research is something to keep in mind as we try to help parents age well--AND also think about ourselves.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same posts, additional resources.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, March 9, 2011>
...And What Children Can Do to Help Their Aging Parents From Day 1 Senior Advisor, R, has been out of the rehab facility for a little over a month, but returns twice a week for out-patient physical therapy.
I took the opportunity to interview M, Director of Nursing, at this "A"rated facility, wanting to pose questions that I thought would help others.
Admission advice?1.
Have at-the-ready: ID, Medicare card, Insurance card.
If a POA is involved, the facility needs it asap (within a few days).
2.
If parents come in an ambulance from another facility, all possessions that were in their previous room are transported to the facility.
3.
Because they are going to be up and dressed every day, they will need appropriate clothing (shoes, sweater etc.
), personal care items, and all meds from home (including vitamins).
As M says: "Every pill."
Then what?1.
A doctor, following Medicare guidelines, will do an evaluation within 72 hours.
It should be sooner than that unless the parents come in on a weekend--then it's a wait until Monday.
2.
Emotions can run high at this point.
People need to understand that the skilled nursing staffing ratio is not the same as in a hospital (where it's probably 1-5).
More likely it will be around 1-16.
So expectations can be unrealistically high at the beginning.
3.
The doctor (who is there each week, but not each day) may only see the patient, after he/she is stable, once a month.
However, the skilled nursing staff is the "eyes and ears" and regularly conveys patient information though telephone conversations to the doctor.
4.
That said, according to M, "patients have more contact with the staff than in a hospital."
I'm thinking probably because their needs are different.
What additional information helps aging parents if shared?1.
Knowing about parents' individual needs and routines --do they use a night light, have sleep apnea, unusual sleeping patterns (a farmer accustomed to getting up at 4am, for example will want an earlier breakfast if possible), are they incontinent etc, etc?
2.
In answer to my questioning as to whether certain personality types fared better, M gave me surprising information.
"If they've had anesthesia, they may be like a different person.
Anesthesia is probably the most crippling for this population.
It has to wear off and usually hasn't when they come to us."
*                    *                    *                  *                *                                         My experience: while Senior Advisor R was in the rehab facility, we realized communicating with the staff, when appropriate, got things done in a timely fashion, whether we or R initiated the discussion.
R's take: upon admission to a rehab facility one must make a complete adjustment.
One must accept the way things are.
"It's not like a hospital--not like having someone at your beck and call when you ring the call-button, says R," adding "It's not real nursing (except for those who must have it).
Asking the hardworking staff for more than one's entitled to only incurs frustration for both patients and attendants.
Realizing this early, helps.
Indeed some people make themselves miserable wanting more than the staff can provide."
As we try to help parents age well, if a rehab facility should enter the picture, draw upon R's wisdom regarding the saying she learned in rehab: "We're not here to help you, we're here to help you go home."
That's the important thing to focus on," she says.
Visit my other site: http:''helpparentsagewell.com--same blog, additional resources 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 8, 2011>
...And what rehab centers need to know to help aging parents An interview with the Director of Nursing for the inpatient rehab and skilled care facilities where R spent 4 months will fill this space tomorrow.
Sorry post delayed a day, but I think the wait will be worth it.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 5, 2011>
"What should 97-year-old people eat to stay healthy?"
Who better to ask this question of than Sr. Advisor, R, whose broken hip recovery has been followed in my blog this year.
While the following has worked for R, it may not work for everyone.
Nevertheless, R. shared the following in a quick phone call.
First, she eats "very simply."
Breakfast consists of oat meal or cheerios, with fat-free milk, fresh fruit, and sometimes toast--raisin bread, whole wheat or milti-grain ("never white bread").
She has 2-3 helpings of fresh fruit daily--sometimes berries or banana with her cereal and/or orange juice with pulp.
(Note: frozen fruits and vegetables are frozen at their peak of perfection and are said to have the same nutritional value as fresh--and even more than fresh, if the fresh have been sitting around for a while.)
Living in her own home and cooking for herself, she buys frozen dinners--"Eating Right" (a Safeway product), and "Healthy Choice," (available at most grocery stores).
She especially likes the large variety of dinners "Eating Right" offers.
Since the dinners can be expensive, she looks for the sales; sometimes it's less expensive to buy 3 at a time, she says.
It's comforting to know she has a supply in her freezer.
She makes a green salad nightly to accompany dinner and ends with dessert.
"Eating Right" makes 100 calorie ice cream in new flavors--an alternative to yogurt with fruit.
Now we know R reads labels for calorie count.
She also checks grams (g and mg.) of fat, cholesterol, sugar, sodium and fiber.
While she has no problems that necessitate reduced sugar or salt, she "never overdoes."
That said, she loves candy, "always has some in the house, but eats it in moderation-- 1-2 pieces, depending on size".
The frozen dinners, she says, may have too much sodium for people on sodium-restricted diets.
She has always watched her salt intake because she knows salt isn't good for you, not because a doctor has said she should.
So, for example, she prefers low-fat cheese because it's less rich (but also has less sodium and "you get used to the taste"), and lite mayonnaise.
She eats a lot of fish; avoids rich and fatty food.
(The frozen dinners she selects are no problem in this regard.)
Even if she initially loves the taste, she has learned to avoid food that "gives her discomfort" after a meal, and that's the rich and fatty food...although she loves a good hamburger now and then.
But that's the point, she says, "once or twice--now and then"--not as a regular diet.
R never drank coffee, likes hot tea in cold weather, and drinks a lot of water.
We know older people don't get as thirsty as young people, but still need to drink a lot of water daily to remain healthy (and give medications the best chance to do their job).
Check with doctor for daily recommended number of 8 oz.
glasses.
We should know our parents dietary restrictions.
Making certain aging parents get the nutrition they need is another way we help parents age well.
So we may need to schedule a time to take them to the grocery store on a regular basis.
Bon Appetite!
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com    Same blog, additional resources. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 1, 2011>
While R was in rehab I watched emergency and ambulance-type vehicles come and go carrying patients needing rehab: some accident victims; some stroke victims; some, like R, with broken bones who had undergone surgery, plus others.
A sophisticated stretcher-type apparatus hugged these people to its contours, strong men carried all into the automatically opening doors of the rehab facility.
Being curious, I asked one of the attendants, who drove the emergency vehicle and carried the patients into the facility, about the job.
He had done it all--from fatalities at car crashes to transporting the very young and the very old.
He was a big man; obviously strong.
He also had a big heart and had been--and still is-- caregiver for his elderly aunt.
"Can adult children do anything to help aging parents needing to be transported by ambulance?"
I asked.
His reply "Yes, they need to stay calm and help their parents stay calm."
And then he went on to elaborate on how difficult this can be.
I share what I learned.
People being transported in an ambulance are always scared, and often in pain.
Fear of the unknown is usually great, although possibly less when one is being taken from the known of a hospital, as was R, to a rehab center where there's a specific program aimed at returning to normal mobility.
The attendant said he does his best to calm patients and their families--makes it much easier for the professionals to do what is necessary for the patient as quickly as possible.
When a patient is agitated, everything is more difficult and when family members add to the stress, it's doubly difficult.
That said, he reinforced how scary it is for the patient.
He shared that he had been in an auto accident and had been put in the ambulance.
No matter the knowledge and experience he had, he was hurting and scared--mostly scared, he said, that because he was so big he might be dropped.
He said he knew how well-trained everyone was, "but when you're in pain and you've lost all control you become scared."
We can help aging parents in this situation; but it's not easy.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com   Same blog, more resources 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 26, 2011>
4 Common Mistakes We Make When Trying to Help Parents Age WellSome "courtesies" today may be considered good manners, but in fact don't help older people age well.
They chip away at independence and work against physical fitness, so necessary for successful aging.I've become conscious of this since my 97-year-old mother-in-law (and Senior Advisor to my blog, R) has made a full recovery from her broken hip and is again living alone (with an alert pendant) in her home of 60+ years.She still goes to physical therapy twice a week, where she's being trained to walk confidently on her own--without cane.
Surprisingly I realize my instincts weren't helping this goal.After spending 4 months in a rehab center doing physical therapy to strengthen muscles and regain her ability to walk, her handicapped parking sticker is readily available.
But why use it to park up close (except in emergency situations) when walking is excellent exercise for her?Nor do I open the car door for her any more.
She was taught how to open a car door and get in properly--cane and all.
It took hard work on her part to accomplish this.
Do I reinforce independence or contribute to her muscle strength by opening the car door?
or closing it?
"It's nice to let people do for you," says R, "but pretty soon you get used to it and you begin to lose independence.
And that happens with too many people.
I've been watching it.
Pretty soon they can't do for themselves what they really are capable of doing--and they lose a lot of their life.
"When/if this happens it lose-lose for everyone, except perhaps for assisted living facilities and 24/7 caregivers.
Adult children must "step up" and fill in.
Don't we want to avoid this as long as possible--if not forever?Are we helpful, when we help old people out of a chair?
If they can get up by themselves they exercise leg and arm muscles.
Older people get up--unaided--more easily from a chair with a sturdy seat and sturdy arms.
Every older person's home should have one--as should their children's.Fact: countless older people can't get off of the toilet due to weak leg and arm muscles.
(Worry not--they've found raised seats in the catalogs and surgical supply places, but why help parents get into that situation?
)When parents use a walker but are seated, for example at a restaurant, it's common to see well-meaning children pull them up from their seat.
This deprives the walker-user from exercising arm and leg muscles, plus elderly people have thin skin--bruising can occur.
We should stand firm, reach out and let the walker-using person grab our hands and pull him/herself up.What else is not helpful?
Basically--even with the best of intentions-- doing anything for aging parents that they can do for themselves.
Also view my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com--same blog, additional features
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 23, 2011>
Ever wonder why Dad doesn't look as good as you think he should?
Appearance is the first thing people notice.
And this is one area--in our efforts to help aging parents--where adult children can make a significant contribution.When we do thoughtful things we help parents age well.
Some of these things have an added bonus.
Such is the case when we help older women and men to look better.Some older men (especially when there's no woman in their life), seem to let themselves go appearance-wise.
Some may just be lazy.
Or they may find it difficult to shave well due to eyesight or dexterity limitations.
Or they may live alone and have difficulty getting to laundry facilities in a basement or elsewhere.
Or if they can access laundry facilities, they may be clueless as to how to operate the machinery.Many of these conditions are correctable once noticed so adult children can provide remedies--by helping them get to a doctor or barber shop, by arranging for the laundry to be done, by teaching a willing aging father how to use a washing machine and dryer or by gifting a new, easier-to-use razor, an article of clothing and/or an appointment with a good barber.
(Is a professional shave a gift idea?
When Dad was in his final months I remember his delight when the caregiver gave him a shave in the morning, complete with a warm, damp towel.
)While thoughtful overtures definitely bring pleasure, helping an aging parent look better offers 2 more potential benefits: improving strangers' reactions to him--be it at the grocery store, a new doctor's office, wherever; and getting compliments from people who know him and notice the change.
All enhance self-esteem.Grooming and clothing-- can make a big difference.
A clean-shaven man makes a good first impression.
Stubble and that unshaven look tend to be vagrant-looking on most old/older/elderly men... unless of course your dad or grandfather has the looks off a Brad Pitt, Justin Timberlake.Hair loss, an issue for men, leads to some strange/creative hairstyles which a good barber should be able to restyle more suitably.
Dad solved this problem with a hat to protect his balding head and avoid more skin cancer.
Here, at 91, he's at my oldest, best friend's beach house.
We stayed overnight reminiscing, with the priceless warmth countless years of friendship provide.While older men don't need fashionista clothing, it needs to be neat, clean, color coordinated and appropriate for the occasion.
This 72-year-old, recuperating from major illness, had just come from physical therapy and was waiting for his wife.
"She'd kill me," he said, "if she thought I was having my picture taken looking like this."
But he's clean-shaven, his hair looks fine on this windy summer day, and his clothes are in order.Many elderly fathers have favorite clothing combinations that they wear again and again--like a uniform.
Before everything wears out, what about taking dad shopping?
Visit stores or websites--or surprise him with a gift of clothing that enhances his wardrobe.
Sounds like a plan.Father's Day is less than 4 months away...but who's counting when we can help aging fathers/grandfathers in more ways than one with a single gesture.  
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, February 16, 2011>
Unexpected help.
Big advantage to aging parents and college football: the Fax machine!The Wall Street Journal reports in a short front-page article "In College Football Recruiting, The Star Player Is the Fax Machine" (2/2/11).
Readers learn the first Wednesday in February is "signing day," the date when high school football recruits can officially finalize their college choice with a signed letter.
To expedite the process the "often ignored" fax machine becomes the focus of anxious coaches as the signed letters roll in.
"I've never seen a bunch of grown men so worried about a fax machine, said the University of South Carolina's recruiting coordinator," (according to the WSJ).Of course!
Fax machines are more affordable and easier to use than the newer technology that scans and sends, so "everyone" has access to them.
Yet the fax's attributes are often overlooked when thinking about helping aging parents and older people who don't use current technology.How is it helpful?1.
Health Issues: We can fax the doctor's office to inform of a health issue, asking for a fax or phone call back if we're asking a question (ie.
Mom wouldn't take her medication.
Says it's making her nauseated.
What to do?)2.
"Heads up" for doctors:  Within 24 hours of an appointment, fax with specifics of reasons dad is coming in.
Saves some precious time when we're there.3.
Clarifying problem mail: At times parents have confusing bills or written notices.
Once faxed to adult children, they can usually help untangle things to the point where parents can take care of the problem themselves.
If not, the problem is not a surprise and children are "ahead of the game" when they need to intervene.You'll no doubt think of other uses for that old fax machine.
Or perhaps you'll buy an inexpensive new one.
As we try to help older people age well, maintain independence and confidence, isn't it important that we try not to do for an aging parent what he/she can do for him or herself --even if we can do it faster and easier?
The fax still has its place.
Visit my other blog: http:helpparentsagewell.com  Same post, additional resources.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 15, 2011>
Subject: often ignored technology called "king" for college football recruiting, has relevance for aging parents, older and elderly people, as well as the old old--and perhaps for ourselves!   
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 12, 2011>
Want to know one of the best possible Valentine's Day gifts you can give an aging parent--especially one who is lacking confidence, feeling beaten down, or is having a hard time?
A sincere compliment...spoken--or why not written on a Valentine?Older people and the elderly, in the three groups just mentioned, get relatively few compliments when compared with younger people.
And isn't making people feel good what Valentine's Day is all about?Remember the Valentines with our names on them that were pulled out of the red decorated box in our grade/elementary school classrooms on February 14th?
Of course the most popular kids got the most Valentines, but--possibly owing to a sensitive teacher--everyone in the class got at least one pretty Valentine with a nice message.I remember my 80-something-year-old grandmother would tell us--sometimes several times--about compliments she had received.
And why not?
It made her feel good, did something for her self-esteem and we kids would usually chime in in a way that confirmed the compliment and made her feel even better.Yesterday a lovely and sensitive friend, Carol, who I've known since college, sent me a note.
In it she enclosed a note that my husband's mother (senior advisor, R) had recently written her from the rehab facility, thanking Carol for her Christmas card and wishes for a speedy recovery from her broken hip (described in my January posts).I phoned R, to read her Carol's note and the complimentary and fitting adjectives she used when writing about R. While R is truly an amazing woman (all my contemporaries say she's a role model), who gets many compliments at 97, I knew she was pleased when I read Carol's note over the phone.
And then she said, "And Carol sent me a Valentine...." and I could hear how unexpected and pleased it made her feel.Almost all the really old (90+) people I sent Valentine's to over the past decade have died--the last one being Alberta, the wife of the WWII veteran (mentioned in my May posts about veteran's benefits), who died in her sleep last week.
Edie--at 100--remains and I will e-mail her Valentine to her daughter's e-mail (she now lives with her daughter)  in Tennessee.Sincere, not contrived, compliments make us all feel good.
Perhaps the unexpected ones written on a Valentine make aging parents and the elderly feel especially good as we strive to help parents age well.Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com--same blog +
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 8, 2011>
How Elderly Drivers Become a Road Hazard:Part of the ProblemI've forgotten whether Dad's driver's license came up for renewal the year before or the year after his 90th birthday.
What I do remember is the fact that it was renewed for 8 or 10 years.
(Other states have this renewal procedure, I've found.
)Dad went to the DMV bureau in a smaller town 20 minutes from his home.
Parking was easy; they were nice.
He had a habit of keeping his wallet (with driver's license) hidden in the trunk of his car.
As he began the renewal process he realized he didn't have his soon-to-expire license and told the DMV person it was in the trunk of his car--he'd get it.
No problem--the computer could access data.
He only needed proof of who he was.The only "document" that had his name: a Safeway Grocery Store club membership card in his pocket.
ID accepted.
Renewal granted.
(Thankfully Dad was a good, safe driver.
)Fact: Some older drivers (and others) drive under "ify" circumstances.Fact: When it's threatening to life and limb, prevention is key.Fact: Parents resent being forced to do something, just as we would resent our children forcing us to do something.Fact: The entities and agencies, you would expect help from, may be of little or no help.Parents who drive dangerously must be stopped, but how--without straining family relationships?
If you're an only child, it's your burden.
If there are siblings and the majority agree, you can say "we're worried about your driving and while it hurts to tell you this, the majority of us think your driving at this point is dangerous so we need your help to think about options."
If this presents problems, see #4 below.The Strategy and Reality#1.
What seems like a major problem, may be easily solved (could be medications).
Remind "with-it" parents of this.
Including them in pondering the problem and acknowledging  the problem may be easily solved, is respectful, empowering, and helps them buy into whatever may come.
To rule out serious problems, with your parents agreeing and perhaps making the call, consult the primary care doctor, which may lead to testing (eg.
vision, neurological) or medication changes.#2.
If it's not correctable, the doctor is in a good position to deliver the message.
This is a huge loss, a chunk of life is being removed.
Doctors have practice in delivering bad news and hopefully do it in a skillful way.#3.
Many adult children have phoned police, insurance companies, DMV etc., in efforts to curtail parents' driving.
The results vary.
It's sneaky, which is disrespectful and undermines self-esteem among other things.
Understandably children usually don't feel good about it.
Only as a last resort, it may have merit.#4.
If we must deliver the stop-driving message, how do we give facts, affirm our parents' ability to participate in the decision-making and arrive at a no-more-driving result?
If we're uncomfortable attempting this and have watched the we-need-to-talk link in Saturday's post, a social worker experienced with the elderly can be a big help.
Contact a local family counseling agency or an agency with social workers specializing in geriatrics.
They've no doubt helped countless aging parents and their adult children resolve the driving dilemma.Also--Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 5, 2011>
We begin to realize, for aging parents life is a delicate balance--physically and mentally.
J reminds us in the first driving post that no one likes seeing a lessening of him/herself--but "there comes a time."
And when the time comes, no one wants to be told what to do, made to feel he or she is being treated like an infant.
So how do we discuss driving with parents?Most of us think driving is necessary to maintain quality of life.
No wonder we dread having the not-driving talk with our parents!
To help parents age well we don't want to diminish their quality of life.
If we can have this talk before driving is an issue we're a step ahead.
If we're in crisis mode, it's so much harder.Since it makes sense to have good information before plunging into anything problematical, I begin with a link to another AARP's web offering:  http://www.aarp.org/home-garden/transportation/info-05-2010/We_Need_To_Talk.html.
The  6 1/2+minute "We Need to Talk" video, obviously well-thought-out and professionally produced, may resonate.
Click it on, turn up the volume, take time to watch it and listen.
If it doesn't meet your needs, read on for strategies I knew, wish I'd known or tried successfully with my parents, that can improve chances for success when attempting difficult conversations.With the goal of helping aging parents and the realization that "one size doesn't fit all,"  I put older drivers into three groups:1.
The first group know themselves, are honest with themselves and quit driving when they should.
They have pride and don't appreciate being told what to do.If your parent is in the first group like my father was, you're lucky.
Dad took the "Driving Miss Daisy" movie to heart; we had the driving discussion early.
As a far-away-living adult child who believes in empowering, I found excuses to visit him every 4-6 weeks after Mother died.
Friends constantly pressured me to make him quit driving after he turned 90.
If there was no threat to life and limb, why do that?
I checked his car for scratches, dents, or newly painted areas during each visit.
(I would have done that regularly, even if I lived in the same town.)
If we were going some place together, I always asked him whether he wanted to drive.
He volunteered at least once each visit.He stuck to the speed limit.
Not over, not under.
His depth perception was better than mine.
He no longer had the radio on.
"A distraction," he said.
He maintained control and ultimately decided to stop driving at 93.2.
The second group is in denial.
Denial, a psychological defense mechanism, can exist without our realizing it.
It keeps us from facing a reality we're not yet ready to deal with.
Can we speed up parents' readiness to face reality?
We can only try.
An often successful strategy pulls them in as a partner to find a solution.
We could offer information about resources that extend older drivers' ability to drive, sharing information from the last post's links; or could introduce an objective observation about their driving--or about something connected to their driving that could be problematical; and encourage conversation hoping something resonates.For example, my mother had a stroke.
She recovered well, but her balance was shaky.
She worried about falling.
She still planned to drive.
My kneejerk reaction was to tell her all of my reservations.
Instead I said "let's figure out how."
I said that she could drive (true); she could have lessons to boost her confidence or go with me to a large empty parking lot if she wanted to try that first.
I also explained that she would have to be able to get in and out of the car by herself and maneuver her walker alone (reality).
At first she said she wanted to try, but then decided there was too much effort involved.
Perhaps because Dad was still alive to drive her, she never drove again.3.
The third group, downright dangerous drivers, will be discussed in the next (Tuesday's) post.......to be continued.Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same blog, more resources
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 1, 2011>
Help Parents Age Well by Driving--or Not?
Important Links--read on.."Perhaps the scariest road hazard is the one they don't make a sign for." The large bold type on the back cover of the August  2009 New Yorker caught my eye: The silhouette of a girl, leaning forward, hands on the steering wheel, pony tail flying fills a drawing--a yellow and black, road-hazard-shaped sign, with a smaller sign just below saying TEENS.
I save the back cover.If teenagers are "perhaps the scariest road hazard," what about older drivers?
We've read the research: drivers age 55 and older are 25% of the driving population but have only 1% of the accidents.
AARP tells us that older drivers usually drive fewer miles each year than younger drivers, so we must consider that.
Also the number of accidents per mile rises sharply at age 75, which may be why some think older drivers are scary.The New Yorker back cover informs us that "teens make up only 7% of America's drivers but account for 12% of all accidents," elaborating "IN 2007 TEENS KILLED MORE THAN 3,000 PEOPLE IN OTHER VEHICLES." With the goal of helping parents age well, which involves supporting self-esteem and not curtailing independence prematurely, how do adult children proceed?Aging parents.
Teenagers.
Signs of dangerous driving.
Are we more likely to ground a teenager (whose whole life is ahead) but take away the keys and permanently change the life of an older person?
The consequences of unsafe driving are usually far more life-changing for the elderly.
Also-- should one size fit all older drivers?Unless there's a threat to life and limb, when trying to help parents age well think "Make Haste Slowly."  Having good information ahead of time, leads to informed decisions instead of knee-jerk reactions.
Taking time to think things through avoids the sobering, life-changing reality of "taking away the keys" unnecessarily.
While my parents were alive, I was clueless about information and programs to help older people continue drive or conclude that they shouldn't.Information I wish I'd known about:AARP's site, http://www.aarp.org/home-garden/transportation/driver_safety/, with information about AARP's Driver Safety Course, (added bonus--usually a discount on auto insurance).
A friend told his mother that he would take the course with her every year.
As long as she passed, she could continue to drive--assuming no accidents.
(She stopped driving at 98; they both took the course many times.)
Check out other AARP information, ie.
warning signs for when to stop driving-- http://www.aarp.org/home-garden/transportation/info-05-2010/Warning_Signs_Stopping.html,  CarFit, http://www.car-fit.org/, sponsored throughout the country.
Individual appointments are scheduled for a "quick comprehensive check" examining how well your car fits you (your parent's car fits her/him).
End result: recommendations for car adjustments and adaptations, and a sheet of resources.
I went to our woman's club one day, found "CarFit" was taking place in the parking lot, asked if there was time for me, and was surprised to find my mirrors weren't adjusted to give me the best range of vision.Lastly, booklets: The Effects of Aging on Driving Skills, is excellent, free, and small.
Downloadable from http://www.usaaedfoundation.org/ (phone 800-531-8159).I also like The Older and Wiser Driver, http://www.aaafoundation.org/ Put "older and wiser and driver" in the search space, the brochure comes up or phone (202-638-5944).The preceding may keep capable older parents, driving longer--safer.
When older people can continue to drive safely, they maintain their independence, their way of life.
We know that.
They feel good, so we feel good as we help parents age well.
Go to my new site: http:helpparentsagewell.com for additional information
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 29, 2011>
This e-mail photo was forwarded to me by a casual acquaintance who doesn't know I write a blog.
I could see the humor, yet my reaction was not to laugh.
It perpetuates the idea that older people are scary drivers.
When we think "seniors' driving," do we think "responsible older people trying hard to stay independent, alert and safe?"
Hummm.....Next Tuesday's post will impart specific information and help for the senior driving dilemma.
Today I let you into the heads of older women participating in a driving discussion at a Woman's Club in New York.
Prevailing reluctance to give up driving coexists with an acute awareness of responsible driving."I think one of the worst things is, when you can't drive.
I can't--I can't envision my life--can you?
It really means a terrible change--It's very limiting-- especially in a suburban community," says the Club President, who's in her late seventies.Ninety-two-year-old, still-driving E adds: "It's the worst thing about getting older...you don't want to lose your independence...but there comes a time..."Eighty-five-year-old L chimes in, "But you can't put someone else's life in danger..."E continues, "If I have a day when I don't feel right, I don't drive; if I feel tired, I don't drive, and I've gotten so I don't drive except when I'm absolutely sure where I'm going."J, whose age we don't know because she won't tell us until she's 100, sums it up: "A lot of people can't be honest with themselves and try to be something they can't be.
It's acceptance...an accepting of a lessening of yourself and it's not pleasant.
But you have to settle for some of this."Honesty.
Acceptance.
Why, when it comes to driving, do these traits seem to be lacking in otherwise rational, older adults?
One answer lies in a powerful psychological defense mechanism: denial.
It's the opposite of acceptance.
Mental health professionals tell us that denial protects us from having to face a reality we are not yet ready to cope with.J, is a no-nonsense woman, who graduated from law school in the 1920s.
It explains perhaps why she instinctively evaluates, is honest with herself, and has recently confined herself to local driving.
Of the "old school,"she gave up her profession, raised a family and joined a garden club.
While she had been driving major highways for decades to judge garden club events and flower shows, she says one day she began feeling less comfortable.
"I kept thinking about the possibility of an accident--someone else's--on the highway and I asked myself, 'Do I want to risk getting stuck in a traffic jam and having to wait for an hour or more on a major highway?'
Then I realized highway driving wasn't enjoyable anymore... It's something--limiting my driving--I do for myself.
No one wants to be of a certain age and be treated like an infant.
I want to make these decisions for myself."How long should the elderly drive?
This question haunts almost every family with aging parents.
As we try to help parents age well, getting as much information as possible for mentally alert parents, before a problem arises, makes sense and can prevent older parents from feeling diminished, from being treated like an infant.
Stay tuned for this Tuesday's post.
Note: Please visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com--same blog, more resources.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 25, 2011>
R. is going home.
She's using a cane (for short distances); a walker for longer distances.
Her recovery is due to a variety of factors including the fact that her doctor deemed her health very good for a person her age.
Summary of R's broken hip and recovery:1.
Her broken hip (from a fall) involved a broken femur.2.
Her doctor insisted on a highly experienced orthopedic surgeon who had "good hands" and thus could "get in and out quickly" when putting in the pin.
Surgery causes trauma to the body at any age, but more for old people.
Less time in the operating room, less blood loss, less anesthesia, less trauma.3.
R came out of the anesthesia quickly.
The hospital stay went as planned.4.
First priority when selecting the rehab center: physical therapy team's reputation.
Narrowed to two candidates, the one closest to R's home was chosen...easier for us to get her daily mail etc.
Maintaining her interest in the world outside herself was important.5.
Initially she was helpless, confined to lying on her back, needing to adjust to new routines, people, food, problems (eg.
everyone was given Tums to boost calcium.
Tums never agreed with her.
Her calcium pills+D needed approval by the rehab center's doctor which took time.
No big deal, but for someone lying in bed it can become a major deal.
Frayed nerves, stressed emotions from pain and the surgery.6.
R quit prescriptions pain killers once she thought she could handle the pain with an over-the-counter drug.
Didn't want side effects of prescription pain killers if unnecessary.7.
Surgeon's orders: no weight-bearing on the side with the broken hip for 90 days.8.
Physical therapy began immediately with the above restriction.9.
Being the oldest "rehaber" R learned to inform the young therapists when she knew she'd done enough.
When she didn't, she would be too sore to have therapy for a day or more, and she didn't want to lose ground by foregoing a day of therapy.
She knew herself--knew when enough was enough for her at 97.10.
R chose not to eat in the dining room.
Older people with bibs or napkins clothes-pinned around their necks to ward off spills was depressing.11.
Once she could sit in a chair--rather than lying in bed--she alternated with sitting, conscious of moving as much as she could each day.12.
90 days later, new x-rays showed hip healed.13.
Her therapy changed.
Able to bear weight on both legs, she had to learn to walk again.
Things we do--and she'd done--automatically for decades, she had to relearn.14.
Relearning how to walk, took longer than she anticipated.
Some days were discouraging.
Then suddenly it all began to come together.
She was mobile.15.
She'll stay in her home--no caregiver through choice--with an alert-pendant-bracelet.16.
Scheduled out-patient physical therapy at the rehab center: twice a week.
One of us will drive her.17.
We try to help parents age well.
We've offered our help and will help when asked; but R will "call the shots.
"Note and disclaimer:  This should not be construed as medical advice.
I am a counselor (not a medical person) wanting to share R's experience so people realize under the best circumstances an elderly person's broken hip can heal and one canwalk again.
While this worked for R., it may not work for everyone.Visit my other site:http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same blog, more "bells and whistles."
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 22, 2011>
Attitude+Rehab=97-year-old's Broken Hip RecoveryExcellent physical therapists play a major part in aging parents' broken hip recovery success following surgery.
But there is considerable initial adjustment.An aging parent's broken hip means a lot of down time and takes a lot of patience--especially at first.
Little strength is limiting; lying flat on one's back produces boredom.
Pain and the insecurity of what lies ahead can easily lead to grouchiness and depression in the nicest people--until they see progress.
Because we're a culture of instant gratification and short attention spans--or so they say, older parents may have more patience than we, which clearly benefits elderly broken hip recovery.97-year-old, Senior Advisor R. reports that upon admission to a rehab facility one must make a complete adjustment.
One must accept the way things are.
"It's not like a hospital--not like having someone at your beck and call when you ring the call-button, says R," adding "It's not real nursing (except for those who must have it).
Asking the hardworking staff for more than one's entitled to only incurs frustration for both patients and attendants.
Realizing this early, helps.
Indeed some people make themselves miserable wanting more than the staff can provide."R.
says she continually reminded herself that she was only there for one reason: the therapy---not full attention from an aid whenever she wanted it.
They made it known: "We're not here to help you, we're here to help you go home."R.
laughs when she recalls the first day of therapy: a circle of wheelchairs inhabited by "a bunch stroke victims, fall victims, Parkinson sufferers, mentally disabled--all in physical trouble.
"It helps aging parents to move forward when they understand that some can't do the exercises at first, but shouldn't get discouraged.
"Our strength is in short supply when we begin," R observes.
"While a lot of pain at first is discouraging....there are good days and not so good days.
But you've got to get through it.
""The Parkinson woman, for example, had no expression, her head would go down on her chest, she couldn't follow through, but bit by bit they keep working with her and finally make progress.
There's pain, some exercises are easier, some so hard, some people are doing well, some not so good.
When there's wonderful therapy, bit by bit people get stronger.
"One grown daughter comes for her mother's sessions.
For some mothers (and fathers) their adult children's support is encouraging and it doesn't disrupt the group's work.So we help aging parents' broken hip recovery by finding excellent rehab for them...And then by our presence, our encouragement, our empowering, our running errands as needed...and perhaps by a few prayers.Please go to my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com for more "bells and whistles."
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 18, 2011>
Rehab--Attitude and RealityA broken hip makes one helpless.
Can't move, can't get up and do what you and I take for granted daily.
Excellent doctor, successful surgery, excellent rehab facility.
Yet as R lay flat on her back in a hospital bed after admission to the rehab center, we realized there would be "down days" and physically-challenging work ahead.The importance of attitude loomed front and center.
First concern--whether a proud, successfully independent 97-year-old woman would have the will to endure, and recover from, almost complete dependency accompanied by the pain remaining after surgery and accompanying the physical therapy.Control and Empowering: We couldn't control much, but wanted R to feel empowered, not like a helpless little old lady.
She'd never considered herself that way, that would be so undermining.
To this end, we immediately requested that the staff call her by her first name, never "honey" or "sweety" (or any other too familiar or what she might consider a diminishing pet name so commonly used in care facilities).Next, we asked R to give us orders--where to put things, what things she wanted us to bring her from home, what we could do to make the room more user friendly for her etc.
etc.
That gave her a smidge of control.
Within a week, she also tried to control what little she could.
"Pick the dead leaves off that plant, she would instruct.
"I don't want to look at dead leaves," she'd emphasize."
"I don't want clutter in this room," she'd say.
We complied with any "orders".
Her mind worked well, we wouldn't interfere unless asked.Adjustment: The first week in an institutional setting is similar to a child's going to school for the first time: unfamiliar routines, new people, different food, expectations, surprising disappointments.
When we don't feel good, we're weak, we lack energy and we're not mobile.
We may not feel much like adjusting.
We may be cranky or worse.
Understandable, isn't it?
Here's where focusing on the big picture helps.What's the goal?
keeping the goal always in mind, helps dilute the disappointments, insults, temporary setbacks--equally applicable to help aging parents and their children.
The goal in R's case was to be able to walk again, have independence and not be confined to a wheelchair.
But R had an intermediate goal because of her surgeon's instructions to the rehab center: "no weight on the left leg for 90 days," then an X'ray to be certain the hip was healed, before regular walking could be added to her physical therapy routine.Patience: Unbeknownst to us, until she told us she had passed the half-way mark of 45 days, R was mentally crossing off the days until her return to the surgeon and X'ray--90 days.
....to be continued
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 15, 2011>
97-year-old Recovers and Regains Independence After Fall and Broken Hip--Part 1Finally, I'm back.
Getting wireless internet connection while out here with R, as she prepares to leave rehab, took longer than expected.
That said, a recap of R's experience will, I hope, provide a frame of reference for those going through this not-for-sissies/prima-donnas experience.For everyone fearful of...caring for...or recovering from...a broken hip,  Help!
Aging Parents will chronicle Senior Advisor R's fall, her "rescuers," surgical consideration, rehab highlights and insights, and lastly her preparation for returning home.
Ultimately she will be aided by an alarm wrist bracelet, a cane, and a walker with a basket for carrying things (the rehab therapist says she only needs additional support when things must be carried from place to place).
No caregivers.Part 1: The Fall, the Rescuers (911 and doctors)What follows may repeat snip-its from earlier posts.
But the chronology and additional information make it hang together better.
R. didn't have an alert pendant.
In late September she was walking from her bedroom to the kitchen when she noticed her twice-a-month cleaning help had moved something on the desk she was passing.
She reached over to reposition it, realized she was losing balance, grabbed the nearest chair, but it wasn't heavy enough to support her weight, and they both fell on the carpet.R.
remembers she grabbed at a table leg thinking she'd pull herself up; she couldn't.
One side of her body would not move.
She knew immediately she couldn't get up.
That ad, "Help, I've fallen and I can't get up," for the first time--resonated, R said.The next 3 hours were spent inching her way back towards the bedroom, to a telephone.
She rolled over on her stomach and with her arms in front "kinda pulled her knees and body along."
Her knees sustained carpet burns, one of which is still not completely healed.The phone, on a table, was too far to reach from the floor, but there was a waste basket nearby.
R grabbed it, was able to reach up and, after repeated attempts, knocked the phone out of the cradle.
"Very hard work," she says.
She phoned a nephew, who drove to her home, called the doctor, got the answering service, who told him to call 911.The paramedics came immediately.
First 2, then more to make certain her condition was stable then to place her on the gurney and transport her to the hospital designated by her primary care doctor (who by this time had been contacted).Now in the "right" hospital, the next step was the "right" surgeon, for this 97-year-old, with a broken femur.
R's primary care doctor was insistent on one particular orthopedic surgeon who had "technical excellence" and "good hands."
Why?
"Surgery is a trauma to the body.
It is not tolerated as well in the elderly as in the young," according to R's highly regarded doctor.
"It's important to get in, get out, do a quick job with less anesthesia, less blood loss, less time in the operating room.
That means less trauma.
"Clearly these early steps cleared the way for R's ultimate excellent recovery and gave us far-away-living children (one of us was out here almost all the time) confidence that--in terms of helping parents age well--we were on the right track.
To be continued... Also visit my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 8, 2011>
Today's post is brief.
Certain details are needed to make it useful and I don't have them yet.
Nevertheless as we try to help parents age well, knowing  that a 97-year-old broken hip can heal and that beginning to walk again with a walker signals regained independence ahead is heartening.Knowing the value of more specifics, and since I've just returned (my husband, her son, has been here most of the time since the fall), I want to be certain I can accurately convey certain aspects of her fall, diagnosis, prognosis, and progress to date.That said, Senior Advisor, R, is literally in the home stretch.
Her home awaits her.
Having lived independently and successfully alone since her husband's death over 40 years ago, if anyone could have successful rehab for a broken hip, it would be R. She is our only living parent at this point.
Of course, we know the delicate balance aging parents must deal with and probably won't completely relax until she is back home.In the meantime, hoping to have useful details in this coming Tuesday's post....For additional information go to my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, January 3, 2011>
While vision loss is sobering and scary, Jane Brody's NY Personal Health column in the December 28th NY Times, Science Times Section, is an important read, offering strategies and information for people with vision issues.
Those with macular degeneration and Veterans with impaired vision will find this column especially compelling.An 84-year-old man of intelligence and means, who wouldn't settle for a diminished life due to macular degeneration, finds ways to overcome low vision, enjoy independence and quality of life.
His search and the information he uncovers is detailed in Jane Brody's column.
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/28/health/28brody.html?_r=1&ref=healthPass it on.It's hard to predict how people react, because we can't stand in their shoes.
Yet I think anyone with serious vision problems would consider the information in this column a gift of hope.
Agreed?
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 1, 2011>
Happy New Year!
It's happy for us.
My 97-year-old mother-in-law, R, is walking now, steadied/aided by a belt around her torso that the therapist controls to give her a feeling of security and stability.
The hip has healed, her left leg can bear weight, and physical therapy is doing its job.
R has walked for three days now; she says it's "hard work."
More progress updates in another post.Soon R will be ordering an alert pendant.
The information on these last 2 posts can help older alone-living parents, grandparents as well as R (before she goes home) make a selection.
Since R thinks clearly, she wants to read the brochures before deciding (doesn't use a computer).
So I've requested brochures.
You, however, have these summaries and a head start, should your parent prefer a hard copy.The list of companies continues...Life Fone (888-678-0451)  http://lifefone.com/ 30 years in business, it's the alert system of choice (after checking 3 companies) for a smart, older working wife who realized her husband couldn't physically help her if something happened.Range: 600 ft.Response: Don't outsource, have own call center in New York, with trained people, quick response.Testing: Ask older person to test 1-2x a month to stay familiar with system (yet they monitor also)  Battery life: 5 years (free replacement)Contacts: 5 people on listFinancial: No contract.
$24.95-$29.95 depending on number of prepaid months.Other stuff: Easy to install; bracelet, pendant.
Medical Home Alert (800-800-1297)  http://www.medicalhomealert.com/ Good Housekeeping's "top pick" in 2005.
CVS selected MHA as their exclusive provider of Medical Alert Systems in their 6000+ stores in 2007.
A couple I've know many years, in their mid-80's, he still works, recently signed on for this system and is "completely satisfied.
"Range: up to 600 feet from the base.Response: a "911-certified" person in their large state-of-the-art headquarters facility in New York answers within about 2-30 seconds.
Remains on the line until help arrives.Testing: the self-testing mechanism automatically contacts the monitoring center every 28 days; but they recommend that once or twice a month the pendant-wearers also make contact so they feel connected.Battery life: back-up battery continues to operate up to 36 hours if power outage; button lasts 5-7 yearsContacts: no limit to # of names on emergency listFinancial: No contract.
$29.95 a month; 1 month free if pay for a year in advance.Other stuff: in business since 1977.
Easy to assemble and disconnect system.
Easily transportable.
Pendant, wrist band, or belt clip.
2nd button may be free if requested.
Life Alert (800-360-0329) http://www.lifealert.com/, used and liked by several older people.
One daughter says they are "very responsive, have wrist straps and pendants and my mother really likes them.
She checks in every Monday to make sure everything is working.
She prefers the wrist strap since the pendant goes off inadventently sometimes if you happen to press it (while sleeping, etc) .
"On the other hand, in October 2010 my octogenarian cousin phoned Life Alert.
She wanted an alert system and her son's mother-in-law uses--and is satisfied with-- Life Alert.
My cousin reports the salesperson was aggressive: she said she couldn't order immediately--she wanted to speak with her children first; he responded something like "why do you need your children's permission?"
and called her back at least three more times that day.
Life Alert also requires a 3-year contract.
I add this link to ConsumerAffairs.com regarding Life Alert   http://www.consumeraffairs.com/health/ provides another source of information.We try our best to support our parents' independence; we do our best to help them age well.
Yet with many competing medical alert companies and with such similar names, the decision becomes difficult.The other night someone asked me if I get paid or take advertising for doing this blog.
The answer to both questions-NO.
Those of us who are counselors at heart, simply try to make things better for those we care about as well as for who are needy and come into our lives.
Aging parents and older people (add pets and animals) are in this category.
May 2011 be a very good year for you and for those you care about.
Visit my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com to see this laid out correctly.
Blogspot is not cooperating with a bulleted layout.
Sorry.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 28, 2010>
Good News!
My 97-year-old mother-in-law should return home soon, after sustaining a broken hip from a fall in late-September.
Surgery and rehab are successful.
She's in the final stages of strengthening the leg that couldn't be weight-bearing until everything healed.
She will go home with a cane and walker...and an alert pendant.She needs (for practical reasons) and we need (for peace of mind) an alert pendant, which up until now she thought she had no need for.
The doctor says only 3% of people her age make such a good recovery, and it has been hard work.
She understandably doesn't want a repeat of the falling and crawling.Two octogenarians and I gathered information about the following companies, aided by contributions to "the cause" from older friends.
Below are companies rated A+ by the Better Business Bureau.
Clearly our list is not all inclusive, but gives you a start.First, repeating from an earlier post: 9 Things to Consider When Deciding on an Alert Pendant.
1.
Cost2.
If there's a trial period3.
Cancellation/return policy: read the fine print.
Among other things, it seems some people have signed a 3-year contract without realizing it can't be broken, short of death.4.
Ease of installation5.
The range (will the button work if I fall in the laundry room?)6.
If a hearing aid is compromised due to a fall, can the fall victim hear the monitor's voice?7.
How--and how often--the "alert" pendant is tested8.
Whether the alert/alarm signal goes directly to a trained person, is outsourced, or goes to a central place then redirected to a trained person.9.
Portability.
If going to Florida, for example, is it easy to take along?Now, a partial list of companies.
For detailed information on each, go to my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com where the layout works better.American Medical Alarms: (800-542-0438)   www.americanmedicalalarms.comLifeline (1-800-797-4191) www.lifelinesys.com (a Philips product) Life Station (1-866-220-0942) www.lifestation.com.If you have 3 minutes, click this link:http://www.telecareaware.com/index.php/which-pendant-for-aunt.html  and click the "Call for Help" link within this link.
You'll become more informed and--equally important--see how confusing the names are because many are so similar.
List of companies concludes on Saturday.
The details for each company will be posted on my new site, in the same way I'm posting them  today.
Clearly a lot of thought should go into the purchase of an alert system.
The implications for helping parents age well are great, especially for those who live alone. 
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 26, 2010>
The Joy of Holiday LightsChristmas decorations make streets look festive and homes look welcoming.
Especially at night, they can transform the ordinary into something uplifting and magical.
In a world of unrest and uncertainty the colors and twinkling of the holiday lights on homes seem--in a way-- protective, signaling all is well within.
And so it was comfortable for me to take a drive around my town last night to view the holiday lights.After a wonderful Christmas eve party that included many little ones, representing the 3rd and 4th generations of a 96-year-old and his 87-year-old wife, I decided to extend the festive feeling by taking a detour on the way home to see lighted Christmas decorations on streets I rarely travel.While the wonderful decorations are amateur, compared to the extravaganza we've seen in the Phoenix, Arizona area, they showcase the hard work and commitment of families to enhance their homes, yards, and neighborhood--a laudable goal under any circumstance.As I climbed out of my car into the black, frigid night to snap these pictures (wearing non-sensible shoes), I could glimpse party-goers within, hear dogs barking to signal a stranger approaching, and realize some home owners had turned in for the night but left their colored lights glowing warmly in the yard.Standing outside on the edge of their frozen property, I wondered if anyone realizedthe pleasure their displays provide.
I wondered how many of us drive around to look at the lights; then wondered do we take our spouses and our children to enjoy the lights?
Do we ever think of taking an aging parent, relative, or friend?I'm sharing some of last night's pictures here.
(Click on photos to enlarge.)
Perhaps you'll be inspired as I am--to take a senior out for a drive after dark--before the year ends and the decorations come down.After a certain age, many seniors don't drive at night.
So here'a an opportunity to give them a change of scenery, to add interest to their lives--to contribute to helping parents, grandparents, and others age well.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 21, 2010>
The words and melody from the radio fill my car as I drive to the post office to mail the holiday cards.
We have snow.
It looks like a winter wonderland.
And kids, amid shrieks of laughter and merriment, are sledding down our shared driveway on anything they can find that's large enough to sit on.
Sun is shining, snow balls are flying, and I'm certain school vacation is adding to this happiest of times.Then my counseling background kicks in and I remember that holidays aren't always the happiest of times for people.
So I decide to check in with a few older people and see how they're doing.The consensus from my small sample--but there's no disagreement: This is the haa, haa-py-est time of the year for children who have none of the responsibilities of adulthood, for newly marrieds who are looking forward, and for young couples with children who still believe in Santa.It's an especially happy time when older family members are geographically near enough to children and grandchildren so that they can gather together to celebrate and talk about shared past experiences.
Meanwhile the excitement of the children in the family provides a background of energy and optimism.
"The holidays are a time when our mind drifts back to past Christmases that were happy times.
It's a sentimental time," recalls one older widow.
"It's a wonderful time when families can get together, yet a lot of people are completely alone.
As people get older, they have experienced losses.
Especially for those who've lost their mates, other people's happiness can be a reminder of the losses we've incurred.
We're just more vulnerable to that kind of thing when we get older.
""Unless there's a lot of family around and a lot going on, it's not the happiest time of the year.
It's depressing," shares a 70-year-old man.
There's agreement that it takes effort for older people to find this a happy time.
"It doesn't just happen," says one.
"It's what you make of it when you're older," says another.
"If you make the effort to be with people it's good, but it can be exhausting.
We may continue to decorate and continue to write notes on the Christmas cards because we want our home to look festive and we like to get letters back after we write the notes.
But we need to trim down and trim back so we aren't too tired to enjoy.
"So then I ask the question: How can younger people help?
Can they help?
"Stay in close contact with elders--aunts, uncles.
Make sure they're not forgotten."
"A phone call even; it doesn't have to be a visit.
I had a wonderful phone call from a far-away relative recently.
You know older people dholidays,on't relate to an email as they do to a phone call."
"It's nice to take older people out to something, but take them to something that is rather quiet, that isn't too taxing an experience."
OK, everyone.
Why not pick up the phone and talk with at least one older person who lives alone or feels isolated.
Brighten his or her day.
Make these older people feel special, cared about...because they are.
Raise their self-esteem.
Add interest to their lives.
Major studies confirm that connections are one of the most important factors in successful aging.
It may not be the Haa, Haa-py-est time of the year for most older people, but we can make it better.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, December 19, 2010>
Need a last-minute gift for an older person without the enduring the hectic last-minute crowds?
Here's my short list.
It highlights exciting, pleasurable and practical gifts that can help parents and grandparents age well.Lottery tickets, whether they are the scratch-off or wait-for-selection-of-the-winning numbers kind, add excitement to life.
Netflix conveniently provides seniors, who don't go out to the movies, many hours of entertainment.
Filling the car with gas for a senior on fixed income, or helping with other such essentials is a welcome gift.
While shopping and taking out my led pocket magnifying glass to help the saleswoman read the care label on a coat, an 81-year-old lady, buying a jacket for her granddaughter, joined the conversation.
When I asked her what she'd like for Christmas, she quickly replied "my health," then added "and someone filling up my gas tank....I just bought gas and it's so expensive."
An IOU to take non-driving seniors shopping/to the doctor etc.
and back.
While Netflix comes with a gift card, and lottery tickets speak for themselves, making a card for the last two gifts only requires a recipe card or a piece of paper onto which a picture of a car is pasted.
Happy gift-giving.PS  While not easily obtainable (because it takes a while to get), the gift of an appointment at one of the leading hospitals' geriatric departments may be the best gift you can ever give a parent with health issues.
Click the link http://helpparentsagewell.com/2010/09/13/update-on-best-hospitals-geriatric-division-visit/ and read Karen's short letter about her mother's experience.Visit my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 14, 2010>
I've written this before; I write it again: People Change, Not Much.As adult children we have the ability to view parents in a different "light" than when we were young.
Thus,If--thinking back--parents were never self-starters, chances are this will never change.
If they didn't initiate relationships when they were young, what makes us think they will be any different when they're old?
Indeed, certain personality traits may have been masked because of a people-loving spouse who orchestrated the social life.
Or perhaps natural relationships that develop among parents of children's friends, work colleagues, neighbors-- created a ready-made social group.On the other hand, perhaps normally sociable, connected parents have just had bad luck, have lost friends to death or relocating, and can't get going again.
(After 3 months, consider it depression that they should get help for.
)The truth is--lonesome, isolated-feeling older parents can infect adult children with an emotionally-weighed-down feeling.
Another truth is, lonesome seniors aren't easy/fun to be around--so it becomes a vicious cycle.While we can't change who a parent is, holidays like Christmas present an opportunity to delicately insert something into aging parents' lives that can help them age well (if enjoying life more qualifies for this category).Here's where the Presto Printer Mailbox (see last post) could come to the rescue.
Connections to others can come in daily, with "deliveries" much more often than snail mail.
And connections with others is one of the three most important factors in helping people age well, according to every study I've read.If this works, parents can graduate to PawPaw (see last post), where they can receive and send mail.
PawPaw has a free trial period.
Presto has a 60-day-trial period, after which there's a refund if not satisfied.While both of these may be a bit pricey for some, it's the kind of gift a family can join together to give.
And what better gift can a family give than the gift of connecting with others...one of the most important factors in helping people--in this case our parents or even grandparents--age well.Visit my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 11, 2010>
Living far from my parents, I thought gifting Dad with a computer--just like mine so I could help him if he had problems--was a great idea on many levels--including our staying in touch.
Dad had a logical mind and could take apart and fix anything.
Therefore I deduced, he would find using a computer relatively easy.
Wrong!While his hands were steady at 85 and a mouse was no problem, he seemed eager to try but there was no natural instinct (as there is with today's children.)
He was fine when I was sitting next to him; but when I left he couldn't do it.
I'm an educator and know how to effectively teach.
But I failed.
That said--7 Gift Ideas for Non-Tech-Savvy Seniors1.
A computer?
Nancy M., a computer educator who successfully taught octogenarians, among others, for over a decade says: "If people are mentally sound and have the dexterity, they can successfully use a computer."
To start out right, she advises, find a teacher or someone who understands how people learn.
An older person should be taught at home on his/her own computer.
Arranging the computer desktop so that only needed icons are there is a must...reduces confusion, she says.
She also makes a folder for the desktop, containing an individual file with simple instructions for each procedure.
Instructions are there if someone forgets.
(I neglected the last 2 suggestions when helping Dad.)2.
PawPaw http://pawpawmail.com/learn/: easy e-mail for nontech seniors and grandparents.
There's a 10-day free trial period.3.
Presto Printing Mailbox: http://www.presto.com/ E-mail comes to the recipient as a printed-out letter; photos can also be sent.
One-way communication from you to noncomputer users.
There's a monthly fee.4.
Fax: Most aging parents are comfortable with this old technology.
Its original purpose was to transmit letters and documents.
Excellent for: making copies; communication to/from doctors' offices; obtaining copies of records or lost bills; enlisting your help with confusing letters or bills.
When mother was recovering from her stroke, it gave her incentive to exercise her hand and fingers by writing me--then faxing (or have Dad fax) it to me.
Short notes grew into letters--good, meaningful fine motor practice.5.
An ipad: a touch screen is easier than a mouse or keyboard for many older people.
Marti Weston provides excellent information as she shares her experience with the ipad she bought for her dad.
http://asourparentsage.net/2010/12/03/holiday-gift-buying-an-ipad-for-your-senior-parent/#more-5951As many of us know, major studies confirm social connectedness is one of the three most important factors in successful aging.
The above gifts support this goal.While the last 2 gifts don't promote social connectedness, they do promote pleasure:6.
The iPod Shuffle-- "tailor-made for seniors, according to Phil Moeller's "Best Holiday gifts for Seniors" in US News&World Report.
"Once it's set up, to operate it all one has to do is click-on and click-off.
Someone else who is already familiar with iTunes needs to learn what their favorite music is, obtain it, set up the playlist, and load it.
If the senior knows how to operate a TV remote, they'll be able to handle this single-button operation."7.
The Carson EZ read, helps the visually impaired (think macular degeneration) by magnifying a page onto a TV screen.
(Thanks to Susan Estrada, an engineer and member of the Technology and Aging Coalition of San Diego for this idea plus a technology gift guide.
)Gifts that expand aging parents' connections and knowledge, also help them to age well.Visit my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 7, 2010>
We know the holidays can be a difficult time for many.
Yet there's an opportunity to bring a sliver of  joy to them as we try to help parents and grandparents and older people age well.What may be a little thing to us--(making a nursing home basket like those featured on my blog last week) can surprise with its impact.
*  *  *Dear Ladies,My nice little plant is doing very nicely and is happy.
The Christmas tray and notepaper plus pens are a wonderful gift.
We are all very appreciative of all the goodies you sent to us.
You make our holidays much more exciting.
We are old and sick, not dead.
I hope you all know that your thoughtfulness is appreciated.My Christmas basket from last year still decorates my room.Thank you and God Bless.VM*  *  *While no more important than a gnat's eyelash when compared with the challenges of the older people in nursing homes, normal age-related changes affect many people's eyesight as well as strength as they age.
For them two of my most favorite, most  helpful small gifts (pictured below):A wonderfully-designed pocket magnifying glass--with LED light that gives light and 3x magnification with a simple pull.
$9.99 at the Container Store.
(It also comes in a low vision model  called "Low Vision Amber Contrast.)"
The website has more details and lists additional stores.
http://www.lightwedge.com/Shop/On-The-Go/Pocket-Magnifier-with-LED-Light.
In addition, the Container Store's site has reviews:  http://reviews.containerstore.com/1626/10017878/led-pocket-magnifier-reviews/reviews.htm   The best jar opener I've ever used, no matter the size of the screw-top--and it's FREE: a wide rubber band (found on produce in grocery stores or produce markets).
Note below how it grips the cap on the jar/bottle.
Older people's grips weaken, making twisting off tops more difficult.
Rubber band to the rescue.
Just twist and turn.
PS--it takes up no room.
Gifts needn't be large or expensive, we know that.
Sometimes, as we also know, it's the little things that mean the most.
And both of these gifts--as well as the baskets for those in nursing homes--enhance older people's exisence and--in many cases--contribute to their aging well.
Magnifying Glass and Rubber BandsPlease visit: http://helpparentsagewell.com.
My new site.
Same post, more information.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 4, 2010>
              "I'm going to a party tonight," says a former colleague, retired years ago and now in her late-80's.
A friend will drive her.
"It should be fun," I say.
"What's fun is to see my old friends," she replies.
"The hostess has been a good friend since grade school and she has this big party every year with friends, their children and grandchildren, who are now teenagers.
Actually the younger generation plans most of it.
""What are you wearing?"
I ask.
"Don't know, will have to see what's in my closet," she replies.It's too late for her, but NorthStyle catalog( NorthStyle.com, 800-336-5666) has velvet drape-neck tops ((NA-133 in chocolate or black) with 3/4 length sleeves.
For a woman who is physically able to put something with a wide-necked-opening over her hair without messing it up, they would look great over black slacks, pulled together with a jacket.
Check out Copper Foil Jacket N4-707 (hand washable).Serengeti (SerengetiCatalog.com, 800-426-2852) is loaded with holiday and everyday wearable clothing...more than I can begin to name, so you need to check everything out!
However, the silver-sequined zipper jacket & velour elasticized drawstring-waist pants set (W9-297) would be great for my former colleague to wear to the party tonight.Appleseeds (www.appleseeds.com 800-767-6666) has the $79 black velvet jacket MQ1-61F (Misses) MQ1FP (Petite) that is a "must-have" for many--along with attractive pants, shirts, skirts, sweaters, jackets, coats, pant suits--you name it.
Definitely check out Appleseeds.
You may find something for yourself too!Lastly, aging/older/old dads.
My dad liked to look "sharp," he would say.
But I could never figure out exactly what that meant or what to buy.
His sister had cornered the pajama gift...at least one new pair a year.His favorite article of clothing in colder weather was a wool knit, button-down-the-front sleeveless vest.
When it was sunny, he wanted cotton long-sleeve shirts to protect his arms from skin cancer when outdoors.
He also liked a nice zipper jacket (lightweight for summer, warm for winter), and slacks with an adjustable waistband.I found the latter (check out 130221 @ $99.50) in The Territory Ahead catalog, which is fairly pricey (territoryahead.com 800-882-4323).
Wool knit sleeveless cardigan vests were always fairly expensive but the ones in this catalog aren't the kind he liked.
There is, however, a wide variety of zipper jackets.
While marketed for much younger men, my dad in his 80's and 90's thought they were just fine--and on him, they were (in fact I still wear his gabardine one with jeans).Remembering parents' physical limitations and personal preferences (make certain flabby arms are covered), makes gifts of clothing more problematic.
Yet if we subscribe to "look good, feel better" it can be worth it, especially for the holidays, as we try to help our parents age well.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, December 1, 2010>
Reassess, Prioritize, Change Plans ("Holiday Gifts for Mothers" postponed 'til Saturday, but read on for nursing home gift baskets), Move Forward  Isn't there a song--"Mamma Said There'd Be Days Like This.."Fly home Tuesday...cross-country.
Weather delay.
Arrive home after 1am this morning.
Early morning commitment for the Woman's Club Open House.
Sleep-deprived.
Volunteered to do a holiday table setting which requires going out to buy flowers for the centerpiece.We're having heavy downpours; high wind gusts.
My car is dead!
Won't start.
Will need a ride to the Club, but first must go outside and cut holly and other greens.
My centerpiece will have no flowers, berries win out.The sore throat that kept me from visiting my mother-in-law at the rehab center the last two days because I was concerned about spreading something--hangs on; and being drenched by the rain as I cut the holly isn't the medicine the doctor would order if I had time to check with him.
Nursing Home Gift Bag Gift for a WomanI want to share photos of some of the Woman's Club's holiday gift baskets for the nursing home this December.
I mentioned them in November's "Gifts for Aging Parents in Care Facilities" (along with a gift list.)
They always look great and contents cost under $12.00 total.
AndOpen House guests always want to buy them, but they aren't for sale.
Click to enlargeOf course, today I wanted to finish the Holiday Gifts for Aging Mothers--4, but can't stretch 24 hours into the 30 hours I need.
Thus, I'm saving the "Holiday Gifts..." for Saturday.In the meantime, a letter received today from K, whose mother's experience with a geriatrician at Mt.
Sinai was shared in September-http://helpparentsagewell.com/2010/09/13/update-on-beshospitals-geriatric-division-visit/:Susan, I took my mother to Mt.
Sinai yesterday for a follow-up meeting.
I can't begin to tell you how much I like it and Dr. P in particular.
My feeling is that they are all just as wonderful.My mother was walking on air when we left.
He makes her feel validated and not just "old and complaining.
"Another gift idea: an appointment with a geriatrician (especially at hospitals with highly regarded geriatrics departments).
It can help parents age well, just as it's helping Karen's mother.
And when our mother's feel good, don't we feel good?
Thanks for sharing, Karen.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 27, 2010>
Holiday Gifts for aging/old/older mothers continues but first--Sr. advisor, R, was able to join--with wheelchair-- the family Thanksgiving celebration.
And it was a gift for her and for the 12 of us.
In our efforts to help parents age well, we were careful not to exhaust her--although not completely successful.
A lot of stimulation is fun, but uses energy that is in shorter supply in older people making it difficult for them to gear down after such experiences.
But it made for good sleeping for R that night, once back at the rehab center.Giving mobility-challenged older people the gift of an outing, if one does this alone, may merit practice with loading and unloading a wheel chair or walker; and may present initial stress.
The staff at care centers is helpful, we found, offering a mini lesson.
In our case, the actual transporting to and from our car was no problem and went more smoothly than the mini lesson.R says this first outing gave her the confidence to go out again.
My husband thinks a drive; I think a drive with lunch.
We'll see.
Of one thing we're certain, she will not go out holiday shopping.
That said, she did ask for one of her catalogs and a looked-forward-to appeal letter so she could order Christmas gifts for those special people (younger than we) who live near and are dear to her; and to make certain a local food bank gets its annual Christmas donation.Holiday Gifts for aging/old/older mothers continued from: http://helpparentsagewell.blogspot.com/2010/11/holiday-gifts-for-aging-parents-2.htmlDraper's & Damon's drapers.com (800-843-1174) advertises a "full selection of misses, petites, and women's" clothing.
They also have: flat-front pull-on pants as well as those with all-around elastic waist bands, Alfred Dunner, Da Rue, additional unnamed manufacturers, and many separates shown with color-coordinated jewelry.
This takes the guesswork out of coordinating a stylish outfit.
Skirts (both long and a bit below-the-knee styles ) and coordinated sporty jackets and pants in velour and other fabrics round out their offerings.
If you link to them you will also learn of their store locations (in 6 states).Coldwater Creek www.coldwatercreek.com (800-262-0040), with stores throughout the country, presented a fashion show at our Woman's Club using some 70+-year-olds members (among others).
I was impressed with the stylish transformation--do I dare say--that CC 's clothing made in some of the women with less than perfect figures.
(Not surprisingly, those models ended up purchasing the clothing they modeled--and more.)
Coldwater Creek has clothes suitable for all ages.
The variety of styles and coordinating colors make it easy to put a good-looking outfit together.Chico's chicos.com (888-855-4986), like Coldwater Creek, has many stores whose location you can easily find on the web.
Clothes are suitable for all ages, with attractive clothing and jewelry suitable for older mothers.
Check out the shawl-type cardigans (no buttons)--warm and cozy while giving a contemporary lookI visited a Chico's and a Coldwater Creek store today.
The sales people were most helpful suggesting clothes for older women.
Also go online.
If you like what you see and it conforms to your mother's challenges and needs, you may be surprised at what works for older women.If you believe in "look good, feel better," an attractive addition to an older woman's wardrobe can accomplish this--another way we can help our parents age well.
If you haven't done so, check out my new site: http:helpparentsagewell.com.
Same blog,  more resources.
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 24, 2010>
There's a never-worn St. John knit hanging in my closet.
Normally a very pricey label, it was so inexpensive (these are the "buys" you can find in NY) I couldn't resist getting it for my mother years ago--her size, her color, two piece.
But she never wore it.
Why?
At age 83, she tactfully told me that she didn't wear short sleeves because of flabby arms.
Who knew?Something to think about after we celebrate Thanksgiving and the shopping begins: our aging parents' particular wants and needs, as well challenges, when selecting clothing.
Can can they button and unbutton easily?
What about hooks and eyes?
clasps to necklaces?
things that zip, button in back etc.
etc.
Do they want to downplay/hide certain parts of their body?
?Senior advisor, R., has always had success with catalogs.
And she always looks well-put-together.
Older people and non-computer-types still shop this way, although almost all catalogs include an e-mail address for shopping on line...plus an 800 #.The list below is carefully selected from catalogs I know older people like, with flattering styles for older people as well as others.
While clearly not all-inclusive, in addition to daywear, these catalogs offer accessories, jewelry and sleepwear plus other gift ideas.
I definitely believe in "look good, feel better."
The following can help achieve this as we try to help parents age well.For older women (as well as others), check out:www.togshop.com especially Alfred Dunner and Koret, two manufacturers whose clothes aging mothers can wear and look well-put-together.Alfred Dunner's pull on pants coordinate with tops.
The all-around elastic waist bands, while easy to pull up, can be an issue for certain figures; but not necessarily, when hidden under coordinated tops.
Koret eliminates the all-around elastic problem on some clothes by manufacturing flat front pants and skirts with elastic in the back or has "hidden elastic" in the waist that expands up to two inches on each side.
www.drapers.com features attractive clothes by other manufacturers than those in The Tog Shop, with the exception of Da Rue, a more expensive line that appears on random pages.
My mother loved this maker's "blouson" a decade ago.Note: Since we're trying to help aging parents with "perfect" gifts that also help them age well and avoid problems:Check the "cozy" gifts: slippers (be certain the soles are non-slippery), robes (are snap-down the front preferable to zipper-types?).
Beware baggy pants, due to the "pull-up" feature.
While they're no problem for some, they do nothing for certain aging figures, unless hidden under tops and/or jackets.
Check whether or not clothes are washable Check return policy Google a manufacturer--I notice both Alfred Dunner and Koret have on-line outlets.
To be continued Saturday.
Happy Thanksgiving.For the same post plus more information visist my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 20, 2010>
Holiday Gifts: Thanksgiving and BeyondMy thoughts continue to focus on aging parents who have had to relinquish control.
R. is still in rehab; but we can bring her to be with us for part of the day on Thanksgiving.
This year especially, it is something that R. has been looking forward to.
She calls it a gift--to be in a normal atmosphere, temporary as it will be.
Makes me think, once again, do we realize what we take for granted?I am reminded by a recent e-mail from reader in his 60's: Dear Susan, It took me about four months when I broke my hip to put weight on it.
The part I hated the most was staying in  rehab.
It felt like jail time to me....But you have to learn to dress yourself and do all the other stuff which we just take for granted.
Tell R to hang in there.I read this to R. and was amazed at how affirming it was for her.
She said, "yes, I feel like a prisoner."
Affirming one's situation or feelings is an intangible gift at any age, but is especially meaningful for old or elderly people.Intangible gift ideas for Thanksgiving day:1.
Conveying the feeling of being wanted (and getting them out of "jail," if doable).
I realize what's doable for one, may not be doable for another.
I think of a woman in her mid-80's, still-sharp mind, mounting issues due to cancer, in a hospice facility.
She wanted more than anything to spend Thanksgiving with her grown children.
With help, she was could have made the short ride to their home; but her devoted children feared she would resist returning to the facility and knew they couldn't care for her at home (as they had previously done).
They visited her on Thanksgiving...had the meal at home without her.Granted, these are tough calls.
Could the facility have given the woman, for example, a 4-hour pass which she knew about so she understood she'd need to return?
Creative thinking ahead of time, can sometimes lead to good solutions for all.
So we need to ask ourselves: "Is it easier/better or us, or easier/better for our parents?"2.
Affirming that they can legitimately contribute...May take creative thinking based on abilities:The oldest man at our Thanksgiving gatherings strings the fresh cranberry necklace to adorn the turkey.
(Necklace idea from an oldGourmet magazine.)
Ask a senior to say grace--or to give thanks for the men and women, at home and in far-away places, who put their lives on the line to protect--and have protected--us and our country.
Assuming they no longer cook or bake, ask women for help with flowers for the centerpiece, or putting a flower in the bathroom, or setting the table, or just looking over the table to be certain it looks attractive...you get the idea.
Being asked to contribute and conveying feelings of being wanted--intangible gifts--  promote feelings of self-worth at any age, feelings that are often in short supply in old/older people as we try to help them age well.
For the same post plus more information go to my new site: http:helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 16, 2010>
Why Rational, Agreeable Aging Parents Can Turn Grumpy:  4 InsightsMy dad was extraordinarily independent.
I knew that; but I didn't know how much he valued his independence until a respite weekend--just three nights and two days-- at "the home" was suggested.My brother (who lived with our father) wanted to go to the beach for the weekend.
There was help during the days to cook lunch and dinner and clean up; my brother was there at night and it worked fine.Dad was a relatively healthy 90-something-year-old at the time who, every week, visited old friends at "the home" who lived in independent or assisted living.
So you can imagine my brother's surprise when Dad vehemently rejected the idea, with so much emotion that my brother was taken aback.
*                            *                             *                                 *Currently R is living at the rehab center.
No option initially.
She needed to recover and move forward after surgery on her broken hip.
This is her 47th day there; 97-year-old bones don't recover as fast as younger bones and she accepts this fact.Looking back over R's adjustment, I understand my Dad's emotional refusal and my mother-in-law's initial feelings.
Thus I want to share insights that I believe are valid--for aging parents who value their independence and probably for most older people in general.Older people take pride in being independent.
It sets them above the stereotype.
It raises self-esteem and confirms capability.
Older people don't welcome change; they're usually more comfortable and confident in known surroundings.
When they must go to an institutional structure (unfamiliar routines and rules) they must adapt, which isn't always easy.
Think: putting your child in kindergarten the first day.
New people, new expectations, and to be successful adapting to the regimen and beginning to make new friends.
The value of special support from adult children at these times certainly helps parents age well.
Loss of control is scary.
Normally pleasant people can become grumpy and demanding, if not depressed.
Needing to navigate new turf with new ground rules can prove daunting, especially when older people feel helpless and are dependent.
As they gain and feel more control (know the nurses, adapt to the routine, understand that it isn't going to be like home) things do improve.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 13, 2010>
Flexibility when an aging parent's health event interrupts their children's lives--important.
We know.
We also know there are only 24 hours in a day.
Squeezing things in and omitting and prioritizing take on new importance.
This is my life at the moment.I flew out to be with senior advisor R, my 97-year-old mother-in law, who has just spent day 45 in rehab.
"They" (whoever that is) say it takes 90 days before older people's hips have healed /mended or whatever enough to be able to put weight on the hip.
That means 45 more days at the rehab center and R is crossing off each one.The physical therapy is excellent, which is the reason we selected this place.
It is convenient to her home, several thousand miles from ours, but not from where we stay when we're here.
However, we must drive over an hour daily--which is the reason I just came out again.
My only-child husband has been doing that daily drive for three weeks (flying home  2 weekends); I can give him some time off.And so I'm on my way to the rehab center--with a stop at the local library to post this.
This article, in Wednesday's NY Times, A Woman's Journey From an Artist's Barn To a Mansion's Wall          http://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/10/nyregion/10cityroom.html is an interesting, enjoyable read that I want to share with you.
It features a woman of privilege and wealth and a centenarian of neither privilege nor wealth from what I gather, whose 64-year-old daughter (with whom she lives) accompanied her on an unusual trip back in time.I wonder if living with her daughter (who possibly never married since she uses her mother's last name which is, of course, her "maiden" name) contributed to her reaching 100 years of age and seemingly aging so well.
Do go to my new site--  http://helpparentsagewell.com--same posts, but more information and carefully selected (by me) resources.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 9, 2010>
The Christmas season began in stores near me days before Halloween arrived.
Personally I like to savor each holiday before moving on to the next, but this year I am as premature as those I am critical of.
While Thanksgiving is two weeks away, because of my schedule I just finished--because I had to-- three holiday gift baskets for people in a nearby nursing home, to be delivered on Dec. 2nd.
It's fun to create  While this delays my intended post, it's clearly a part of helping older people age--hopefully happier if not well--so I'm featuring it today.
You will find some inexpensive gift ideas that older people in nursing homes--or not, whether long or short term--will appreciate.
The suggestions below are within the guidelines of the nursing home near us.
Guidelines may differ so check them out and remember the gifts recommended below are for strangers: chap sticks soaps, lotions or creams with no scent/fragrance comb and brush small stuffed animals pens, pads, stationery sunglasses neckties slippers, socks mittens, gloves, scarves, shawls decorative boxes or containers scrapbooks, photo albums, picture frames candy canes (no other food but this) holiday decorations As you can see from my basket on the right, I've chosen a game theme using 2 of the above items (candy-cane striped pen with santa at the top and stuffed animal), plus a Sudoko book, playing cards, magnifying glass, candy-cane striped pen with santa at top, teddy bear, and vase that will hold seasonal greenery as we get nearer December 2.
Missing are to-be-added-later lottery tickets that bring some excitement to older people who probably lack that kind of excitement --especially if they are long-term care seniors.
Our Garden Club's nursing home gifts are displayed on a long table as part of the Woman's Club annual holiday open house.
Also featured: garden club members' tables decorated for Christmas and Chanukah.
People never fail to ask if they can purchase the baskets made for the nursing  home.
Probably because they look great, not because of the contents.
Each must have fresh and/or dried flowers, leaves, pine cones etc.
as part of the decoration...nothing artificial.
Cost: around $12.00.
The nursing home project, as our garden club calls it, has become a tradition.
By the time the above basket has the greenery and lottery tickets within, and is wrapped in  cellophane, someone would have to be in a very bad way not to have his or her spirits lifted just viewing this gift.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 6, 2010>
Knowing that "ify" balance and loss of confidence contribute to aging parents' concern about falling, and just having written about falling and "alert" pendants, reminded me of one of those "ah haa!"
moments.
I realized that Mother, recovering from a stroke, was not conscientious about doing her physical therapy exercises at home.
For one thing, she needed to walk more.Being a far-away living child, I wanted to make the most of my time with her.
My suggestions only made her feel less adequate.
I wanted to empower.
What better than a short outing to Nordstroms?
We'd have fun.
She'd have to walk.Underway and armed with handicapped tag (and walker just in case), I felt tension thinking about the availability of a  handicapped parking space.
But there it was--just waiting for us.As I was preparing to get out, then help Mother out--flash of brilliance: "Why am parking so close?
The primary purpose of this outing is for Mother to walk more...I'm trying to help an aging parent, not trying to park as close as I can which limits her walking.
"When parents can--and need to--walk more, doesn't it make sense to avoid the handicapped space?
Of course we needn't park blocks away--but we know our parents, we can guage their capability (if uncertain check with doctor) and gradually increase it.Walking--as we know--is a best exercise and costs nothing (unless we do a lot of shopping).If parents need the stability of your arm, check out the dignified, preferred way of doing this in my August 21st post.
And of course shopping carts at the big box stores, grocery stores etc.
provide the stability to make walking easy for older parents.Bottom line: skip the handicapped spaces, unless there's a good reason to use them.
This is just one more way we can help our parents age well.Check out my other site: http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same blog, additional information and resources
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, November 3, 2010>
"Alert" Pendants and Bracelets:  Belt-loop attachable?
Often.
Waterproof for Bathing?
Usually.
Worn Regularly?
Not"I'm very careful.
I exercise regularly.
Of course I know about them, but I never thought I would need one," elderly, broken hip victim.
"Yes, I have one.
I'm not certain of the name....Life something, I think.
You know I have the bracelet on my nightstand, but I never wear it," 90-year old woman who still runs her own business.
"I wear it in Florida because I live alone there.
I keep it on a little table by the front door, that way I can leave it there when I go out and it's there to put on when I come back," 85-year-old woman.Senior advisor, psychiatrist Dr.
Bud, MD, tells us that getting older and realizing age (think: using an alert pendant) gives "a heightened awareness of our fragility, vulnerability, our not being immune to age-related problems...It helps," he adds, "when older people have the wisdom to acknowledge that their reflexes are not the same as those of younger people."
That said, not all older people have the wisdom as seen in the above quotes and in well-publicized statistics.Deciding on an alert system is step one.9 Things to Consider When Making the Decision: 1.
Cost 2.
If there's a trial period 3.
Cancellation/return policy: read the fine print.
Among other things, it seems some people have signed a 3-year contract without realizing it can't be broken, short of death.
4.
Ease of installation 5.
What is the range (will the button work if I fall in the laundry room?)
6.
If a hearing aid is compromised due to a fall, can the fall victim hear the monitor's voice?
7.
How--and how often--the "alert" pendant is tested 8.
Whether the alert/alarm signal goes directly to a trained person, is outsourced, or goes to a central place then redirected to a trained person.
9.
Portability if, for example, staying with daughter for a week.ABC Good Morning America reported (5/13/2009) the following facts: >"Every 18 seconds an older adult is in the emergency room because of a fall," according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
>1 in 3 adults over 65 will fall every year.
>falls cause 300,000 hip fractures a year An additional fact from psychology books: denial, a psychological mechanism, is powerful and unconscious and can prevent us from seeing the obvious; it protects us emotionally from having to deal with something until we are ready.We don't want an aging parent's alert pendant to sit--unused-- on a nightstand in the same way older people leave hearing aids in a drawer, never to come out again.
The consequences from an elderly person's falling and not being able to get up or get help--are more dire than the consequences from their not using a hearing aid.
Of course adult children know this.
The facts given above are to provide objective information to skeptical parents who resist the idea of a an "alert"pendant.While there are many options, making the selection can be tricky.
Ask a friend who wears one.
Some that my limited sample of older people liked, others didn't like.
A 2008 NY Times NewOld Age Blog, http://newoldage.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/12/22/a-call-for-help/ suggests the difficulties.
If you have time to read the comments, one commenter says his company conducted research and found http://www.medicalhomealert.com has the best product.
You decide.Helping parents age well often takes more than a 24-hour day.
This information will hopefully save time.Also Check Falls and Fall Prevention posts: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2010/04/10/aging-parents-falls-and-fall-prevention-part-2/ and http://helpparentsagewell.com/2010/04/14/aging-parents-falls-and-fall-prevention-part-3/ and check out my new site for more resources and information: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 30, 2010>
Halloween comes just before the elections this year.
And aging parents, whether blue, red, white, green, purple or whatever, no doubt have some pre-election angst like everyone else.
So an unexpected, decorated pumpkin may lift the spirits, even when older parents are the bobbing-for-apples, trying-to-ride-a-broomstick type.
Since it's almost Halloween, prices will be very low.
Pumpkins need not have a perfect shape--in fact the larger pumpkin is quite lopsided.
You only need a big skewer, a thiner turkey skewer (to poke holes for the tender stems), whatever you have in the garden, something to cut it with, and a glue gun.
The entire process (minus pumpkin purchasing) takes about 15 minutes.
If you find a creature on sale (pharmacies are no doubt the best bet now--probably near the candy section...at least that's where I found the little scarecrows today), glue-gun it on the top.
Then use your creativity.
I bought a plant at Trader Joe's with the larger of the chrysanthemums, then cut two blooms from the center for the larger pumpkin.
The plant looks undisturbed--perfect on an end table in the house .
After decorating the first pumpkin two years ago, I was told that the flowers actually lasted as long as some bouquets (because of the moisture trapped inside the pumpkin).
It was so much easier than carving a pumpkin--at least for me--and the old couple I took it to (as well as their caregiver and daughter) still talk about it.
I'm off to take them the larger pumpkin.
Tomorrow the smaller one goes to an elderly woman who lives alone.
Happy Halloween!
Go to my new site: http:helpparentsagewell.com  same blog + pumpkin photos, more tabs and a larger, easier-to-read font
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 27, 2010>
Tuesday's NY Times always includes its Science Section, which yesterday presented Part 2 of Jane Brody's Personal Health column focusing on people who aged well--those who have "extreme longevity".
"Delaying Body Decline" and "A Supportive Environment" are two important factors in aging well.
Rather than paraphrasing the column, please click on the link below.The second factor, "Supportive Environment" was not what I expected.
It's not about the people who surround and care about an older person.
Rather it has to do with making certain adjustments in an older person's home--some of which I never thought of.
These adjustments should give our parents an even better chance to age well longer in their homes.Check out Jane Brody's column for your parents and for yourself.
column http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/26/health/26brody.html?_r=1&src=me&ref=general ...and visit my new site (same blog, additional information): http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 26, 2010>
Sorry to have to delay today's post.
When an elderly parent has a health event some established patterns may need to be temporarily changed.
As important as learning when to "let go," is the learning to:Prioritize and do what needs to be done Permit some slack where possible to reduce stress and have a bit of time to regroup--or even take a nap!
Tomorrow afternoon I will hear Gail Sheehy (writer and author of Passages among other books) discuss her new--and we are told--"most personal" book Passages in Caregiving.Until tomorrow-----
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 23, 2010>
Sometimes--more often than sometimes with older parents--stuff happens; you feel used up, drained...like there's nothing left to give or share.
Who takes care of the caregiver?Perhaps we need to look for ways to do it for ourselves.
Can we turn the "on" switch off for a time and regain our equilibrium?The following suggestions have worked for me and for others I know.
Basically they provide a time out when our mind can go into neutral and our thoughts float free.
For multi-taskers, health benefits accompany some of the suggestions below.
I like to walk on the high school track near my home.
8 times around (2 miles) definitely does it.
The repetition of walking clears my head, untangles tangled thoughts that seemingly have no answers.
Suddenly problems fall into place and I have answers and a plan of action.
(Obviously walking has an added bonus: good exercise.
While it may seem daunting when fatigue prevails, the repetition necessitated by walking on a track never fails to clarify problems and illuminate plans of action.)
Some people relax in the shower or tub.
Their mind floats free and they have the experience described above.
Others say mindless hobbies can allow your mind to float free---ie.
knitting, (one person who used to hook rugs tried it again with the hoped for results), jogging, weeding the garden, playing piano... And sometimes a short break for something pleasurable, promotes uncluttered thinking...like turning off, then restarting the computer.
When you need an uplifting, heartening short break, click on the link below, watch to the end.
This older parent--an 80-year-old great-grandmother actually--seems to have aged well indeed.
The video will take you out of yourself; you'll be able to smile, relax, and regroup for a few minutes.
And isn't that necessary at certain times as we try to help our parents age well.
http://video.yahoo.com/watch/7464575?fr=yvmtf Go to my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com for additional resources and information. 
</doc>
<doc date=Wednesday, October 20, 2010>
"Extreme longevity"--what it takes, how to prepare for it, and why certain people are especially well suited for it.Highly regarded, long-time Personal Health columnist, Jane Brody, examined the subject in the first of two articles entitled: "Secrets of the Centenarians" in yesterday's NY Times Science Section.Ms.
Brody focused on the youngest of the 8 people featured (youngest 99, oldest 103).
In answer to the secret of the 99-year's longevity, the role of genetics is discussed.
(They play a part.
According to one geneticist, centenarians are 20 times more likely than the average person to have a long-lived relative.
But genetics is only about 20-30% according to a Swedish identical twin study.
"Lifestyle seems to be the more dominant factor.
")The 99-year-old thinks it's "attitude" and cites three critical elements: resolution, resourcefulness and resilience.
She also gets regular exercise, eats carefully, and follows her doctor's advice.
(See audio slide show online at nytimes.com/health and click on each photo to hear interview.
)My thoughts immediately shifted to senior advisor R, 97, now in rehab and making progress after her fall and resulting broken hip 3 weeks ago.
These same qualities have guided her disciplined life.
R has said many times she doesn't know why she has lived this long, but as long as she's alive she's going to do her best to make the best of it.Coincidently, last week our local paper featured a remarkable 99-year-old who spoke at a fundraiser--a former journalist who, in her younger days, interviewed Arctic explorers; arranged and escorted a secret mission that brought 1,000 Jewish war refugees to the US; covered the Nuremberg trials and was appointed a special assistant to Interior Secretary Harold Ickes during the Roosevelt Administration, among other accomplishments.
Although she hobbled to the front of the room [to the podium], using a walker, "her mind was sharp, her words perhaps a bit slow, but moving and clear," according to the reporter.As parents live longer, we try to help them age well.
People who achieve "extreme longevity," may have something intrinsic--resolution, resourcefulness, resilience, attitude, the discipline to exercise and eat carefully and follow doctors' advice....Perhaps the best we can do is remain caring, supportive, nonjudgmental sons and daughters, help when asked and be there for them as necessitated by health events.
And make certain when we make suggestions about their life style, decisions, needs and values that these suggestions make it better for them, not easier for us.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 19, 2010>
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 17, 2010>
Why isn't this relatively inexpensive, old technology as important to older people indoors, as an umbrella is to them outdoors when it rains?It needn't be worn continuously--as explained in my October 10th post, but can be left near the door so that when a living-alone senior enters his or her homeit's right there; and when the senior goes out, it's left right there.Since the statistics--that people over 65 are at greater risk of falling and the risk increases with age--are widely known....Is it that older people who are fit don't think they risk of falling in their homes?
Do they assume if they've taken or take tai chi and/or other fall prevention classes they are exempt?
Do they fear paramedics will break down the door to rescue them, thus causing damage to their home?
Is it the expense?
There are undoubtedly countless reasons older people reject a piece of "alert" jewelry.To set the record straight:Most people fall in their homes.
Denial may be at work.
Fall prevention classes have clearly been shown to reduce the risk; but that doesn't mean falls don't happen.
The alert monitoring companies give instructions for lock boxes or other ways to make keys available so paramedics can unlock, not break down, the door.
There is an expense, but weigh the expense vs. parental emotional as well as physical pain, suffering, and adult children's time, energy, and stress.
Fear of falling is one of older people's most prevalent fears.
Falling and breaking a hip spells trouble: a long recovery and initially--if not forever--greatly diminished independence.
(No need to spell out how this impacts caring adult children's lives.
)Falling alone in one's home means needing to painfully, slowly crawl to the telephone--usually high up off the floor and thus a challenge to pull down even when one finally reaches the phone's location.If a hip is not initially broken, but has suffered only a hairline crack, what are the odds the hip will suffer a complete break due to crawling?We try to help our parents age well.
Wearing an "alert" pendant or bracelet can clearly help maintain quality of life.
It's an invaluable gift and hopefully a thoughtful discussion will convince parents of its value.
(I'll try to compile a list of well-thought-of companies, whose alert pendants older people like, for a post next week.)
Also check out my new site" http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same post plus informative tabs and pull-down menu.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 12, 2010>
Downsizing?
Moving to assisted living or a nursing home?How to best accomplished this as we try to help parents age well.As we would expect, independent-living parents who decide by themselvesto make a move, leads to the best outcome.
They maintain control.
They decide when and where and have full responsibility.
This doesn't mean adult children play no part.
They can can "weigh in" when asked, but don't run the show.
Suggestions may be particularly helpful to--and welcomed by--aging parents who move to be nearer their children and grandchildren.
"Partnering" is a popular concept.
While partnering with older parents to make this kind of decision sounds fine, it's tricky.
If children badger parents enough, chances are older parents lose the will to argue and give in to something they really don't want.
Result: if parents are unhappy, children end up with additional problems and wonder why parents agreed to the move in the first place.This is undoubtedly why some unhappy, independent aging parents who may need a bit of help, have checked themselves out of assisted living, returned to living independently and figured out how to get the help they need.Keeping independent-type parents' homes unsold/unrented until parents are comfortably and happily settled, prevents their being "trapped" in a possibly unhappy living situation.
It's a good solution, when affordable.
Check out my post about Rodney's sobering--but true--story.Yet some older people thrive in assisted living.
They may have friends there.
They may have felt isolated living alone and enjoy the socialization; or in the case of a friend's mother (whose husband dominated when alive), she loved the "assisted part"--prepared meals, amenities, the activities-- she was like a bird let out of a cage.The biggest challenge: older parents who resist moving, but need to move because their needs can not be met otherwise.
Given the situation, their doctor may be in the best position to explain to why moving is necessary.
Getting help from a geriatric social worker, who has helped families deal with this problem countless times, is another good option.
If there's a threat to life and limb, sometimes there's no choice: we do what's necessary in a caring way that won't leave us with unnecessary guilt.When we do our best to help aging parents, don't we ultimately help ourselves?
As we deal with these issues, two thoughts are worth keeping in mind:1.
IS IT BETTER FOR OUR PARENTS OR BETTER FOR US?
and 2.
IS IT BETTER FOR OUR PARENTS TO DO "X" AND LIVE LONGER, UNHAPPILY ORDO "Y" AND LIVE POSSIBLY LESS LONG, BUT HAPPIER?
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 10, 2010>
Independence vs.
Broken HipWe try to help parents age well and we're aware of the statistics.
After 65 the chances of a fall increase; ditto the damage which  increases as people's bones become more  brittle.
Down the line we realize that many people age, and suddenly look more fragile.So I write yesterday's planned post today, from a rehab center where my 97-year-old mother-in-law and a senior advisor, R, is recovering after falling 10 days ago in her home and having surgery to put a pin in her hip.R., (on my new site click on the "senior advisor" tab) like many older people fortunate to have (as she calls it) "a good brain," values her independence above all.
She took precautions to prevent falling in her home and has never hesitated to gracefully ask for help (your arm) when she feels unsteady.
She never dreamed she would fall in her home and thus, rejected the idea of a pendant that would alert someone she needed help.The result: she fell in her living room, while walking to the kitchen, having noticed a decorative object on a desk had been moved by her every-other-week cleaning person.
She reached over to move it, lost her balance, and grabbed a nearby chair.
But it wasn't heavy enough to hold her upright.
Both fell on the carpet.
The next three hours were spent crawling on the carpet to her bedroom and a telephone; she called a nephew; he called 911, then came to her home.I share R's experience to help aging parents and other older people who live alone and resist bracelets or necklaces with those pendants.
While they won't prevent falls, they do prevent skinned knees with carpet burns, and pain and possible further damage from crawling to a telephone.
And they don't need to be worn all the time.Indeed, a woman in her mid-80's who shares an apartment with her son in the northeast, only wears the bracelet when she enters her Florida apartment--where she live alone in the winter.
She says she leaves the bracelet near the door and puts it on the minute she enters that apartment.While we do our best to help our aging parents, the odds can catch up with even the most smart, independent and remarkable seniors....evident from the older people with broken hips in this rehab center.
We can only try to reduce the damage.
Perhaps R's experience can provide an opening for discussion with older parents who live alone without one of those pendants.Also go to my new site:http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same blog, more "bells and whistles."
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 5, 2010>
Sorry--Still away and unable to write a substantive post.
It's especially frustrating because senior advisor, R, less than a week ago fell, broke her hip, had surgery and is now in a care facility for two weeks of rehab, as I understand it.You know from reading about her (see sidebar), that she's my mother-in-law and is remarkable.
Although presently on the West Coast, I'm flying out to help her tomorrow and will relate her experience.It's instructive, which is the purpose of this blog.
There's also a definite tie-in to last week's posts that I want to share as soon as I'm certain I have correct details and dependable internet access.Until Saturday, when I should have internet access----
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 3, 2010>
I'm away once again and may not have internet access for Saturday's post.
In any event, "fall fashion" will probably be postponed again because the camera isn't behaving.
*                *                  *                    *I'm momentarily using my niece's computer.
She's eleven.
Her parents are not old and her grandparents are no longer alive.
She doesn't know any aging parents; indeed I'm no doubt the oldest person she has regular contact with.While I would like to have had time to write my post, Lilli wanted to start her own blog.
Took her about 5 minutes.
That's it for my time to write--except:Hi everyone this is Susan's niece, Lilli!
You can check out my brand new blog, here!
http://lillibillypeace.wordpress.com/ Your grandchildren/children might enjoy my site, and you might too!
*                   *                 *                 *(I probably won't have my own computer access until Oct. 9th--but who knows??
Check on Tuesday.)
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 28, 2010>
"Picture the scene: parents aren't eating properly, they have deteriorated medically, the bills aren't paid, the mail has piled up, the laundry isn't done, clutter is everywhere.
"These are "typical crises" that prompt adult children to "run to put them (their parents) in assisted living prematurely," says J. Donna Sullivan, LCSW, and Director of Older Adult Services for the Scarsdale and Edgemont Family Counseling  Service.
"It's premature," she says, "because their parents could continue to live fairly independently for another 5-6 years if they took advantage of services that are available in almost all communities.
""What I've seen most is the deterioration of older people's health because they're physically not able to get to doctors or dentists or get their hearing aid batteries...There are services to assist them with meals, transportation, with housekeeping--but they're not getting them.
The bills aren't paid and the mail piles up because they can't see well and need new glasses and ultimately it gets to crisis mode.
These older people need care management, not assisted living.
"It's common knowledge that most people who can remain in their own homes as they age do better.
Why?Home is an anchor offering comfort and the familiar.
Feelings of independence and self-worth remain in tact.
The familiar neighborhood often still provides connections with others.
The well-known physical structure of the home instills the confidence to move about freely within its walls, contributing to mobility and physical well-being unless stairs are an issue.
This probably means it's in most aging parents' best interest when we can help them remain in their homes as long as possible (and it will no doubt make us happier too).
Thus, we may need to find out more about--then use--some of the new technology featured in the last two posts, as well as older technology like the pendant one pushes in an emergency.If this doesn't seem doable, your parent's doctor should know the kind of living situation most suitable for your parents; or a social worker or a geriatric care manager can assess your aging parent's situation and make recommendations.Knowing how important "home" is, raises 3 important questions:"Is it better to respect parents' wishes about where they live--even if it makes it  more  difficult for us?
"How can we make it work?"
"If we can't make it work, how do we--and our parents--go about finding a suitable living situation elsewhere?
"Elsewhere" will be addressed in this coming Saturday's post.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 26, 2010>
What's it really like when technology "keeps an eye" on aging parents?"
The KAISER HEALTH NEWSLETTER (Aug.24th) peeks in on an independent-living, Savannah, Georgia family's dinner-time experience--aging parents, responsible daughter--as reported by NPR (read below or click link blue link after partner for audio).
Also included are additional, helpful technology sites.
TOPICS: HEALTH IT, AGING from the KAISER HEALTH NEWSLETTER  By Jennifer Ludden, NPR NewsAUG 24, 2010  This story comes from our partner Edward and Lavinia Fitzgerald in Savannah, Ga., have dinner while telecaregiver Denise Cady of ResCare, a camera monitoring service, looks on.
(Jennifer Ludden/NPR)Part three in a four-part series  The boomer generation that has grown up with e-mail, cell phones and video cameras is now using all of these things to help care for their aging parents.
That's leading to some odd dinnertime scenes, like the one that plays out every evening in the ranch house of Edward and Lavinia Fitzgerald in Savannah, Ga.They settle at their small kitchen table as their daughter Colleen Henry dishes out the homemade meat loaf, mashed potatoes and green beans that she has brought over.
Edward's health is failing now that he's 83, and his wife suffered brain damage from a stroke.
"Here's your ketchup," Colleen says, as she puts the bottle on the table along with the salt shaker.It could be dinnertime anywhere, but for one thing: There's an extra guest at this meal.
"How's the weather down there?
"That voice comes from a woman who appears on a computer monitor next to the kitchen table.
"Oh, that's Denise," Edward explains.
"That's our good friend!
"Actually, Denise Cady is what's called a "telecaregiver," and for two years she has been checking on the Fitzgeralds every evening from Lafayette, Ind.
She joins in the mealtime chatter just like a friend who dropped by.
Cady asks about the Fitzgeralds' family and neighbors, swaps jokes about the hot weather and chats with Colleen about the meal.
"Oooh, looks good," Cady says.
"Are those fresh green beans?
"The scene may not seem so strange in the era of Skype, when many people use the computer to keep in touch with far-flung relatives.
But Cady can see almost every move the Fitzgeralds make.
Their house is wired with video cameras, like something out of a sci-fi movie, though, at first, you don't notice it.Seeing Everything  Edward points out a camera in the kitchen ceiling.
It's enclosed in a dark-tinted bubble, but you can hear it swivel when it turns to scan the adjoining living room and dining room.Another camera monitors who enters the front door.
It can pan down a hall to show who goes into the bedroom and bathroom, though it can't see into those rooms.
Colleen admits that the idea of video monitoring made her wary at first.In addition to camera monitoring, companies offer other kinds of services to help keep track of an elderly person's daily activities.Some use motion sensors to monitor someone's movement around the house, and daily tasks like preparing coffee.
If a sensor detects that, say, Grandpa has been in the bathroom too long, a relative can be notified by cell phone or text.
Companies that specialize in this kind of monitoring -- such as SimplyHome, QuietCare and BeClose -- provide detailed activity information for loved ones to see on a private website.Medical alert services like LifeStation and ActiveCare offer emergency help at the push of a button.
A similar service offered by Philips Lifeline can also detect falls, instead of relying on the user to push the button.Still other services like MedMinder and Philips Lifeline's ManageMyPills offer reminders to take medication or, in the case of FineThanx, provide automated daily check-in calls and will alert others when there's no answer.
"I was thinking all sorts of things," she says with a laugh.
"My dad sitting around in his underwear.
My mother -- I just thought these people are going to see everything, you know.
And it bothered me.
"But after her mom broke her ankle two years ago, Colleen became overwhelmed with the duties of caring for her aging parents.
And she worried constantly when she wasn't with them.
What if her dad had a heart attack?
What if her mom had another stroke?
"The burden's on me if something happened," she says.Desperate for help, Colleen discovered a new video monitoring service and signed them up.
It has turned out to be a huge relief for her dad, as well.As with many elderly spouses, his wife's condition had thrown Edward into the exhausting role of full-time caregiver.
Now, with the cameras on, he gets out of the house for daily mass and a gab session with his buddies at McDonald's.
"We go down there and sit around and talk," he says.
"That telephone will ring, and I'm home in five minutes.
"Cady or another telecaregiver calls Edward's cell phone if they worry that Lavinia is staying in the bathroom a bit too long.
They've called a couple of times when she had fallen and couldn't get back up.
They also alert Colleen and even call in the middle of the night if something seems wrong.
"They're diligent," Edward says.
"They're on the ball.
And I like it.
"Zooming In  But what about this hi-tech invasion of Edward's privacy?
He says he has no problem with it.
He worries more about strangers coming into the house.
A home health aide does come to get his wife bathed and dressed every day, and Colleen is grateful the cameras can monitor the quality of that care.The company that's monitoring the Fitzgerald house is called ResCare.
At its offices in Lafayette, Ind., telecaregiver Cady sits before two large computer screens.
On one, you can see the Fitzgeralds in Savannah, eating their dinner as Cady chats with them.There are also thumbnail video images of two-dozen other homes, which Cady will check in with over the course of her shift.
If one client signals for help, that image pops up larger.
Children of her clients can log into the same video Cady watches and monitor their parents themselves.This long-distance care isn't cheap.
ResCare's services start at $600 a month and can run well over $1,000 depending on how much active monitoring is needed.
But that's still a lot less than the average nursing home.
"Primarily the people using this at this time are in the beginning stages of Alzheimer's or dementia," says Nel Taylor of ResCare.She says a telecaregiver can remind people to take their medication at a certain time.
They can alert a relative if someone appears confused or in distress.
They can help with the simple tasks of daily life, like the time a client was about to sit down to breakfast.
"The telecaregiver zoomed in on the frying pan and said, 'Maybe you ought to cook the sausage and the eggs a little longer.
The eggs look kind of runny and the sausage is pink,' " Taylor says.A New Paradigm  No doubt, starring in your own daily reality show won't appeal to everyone.
But there are all kinds of remote monitoring systems popping up to keep tabs on a fast-aging population.
Most use sensors placed around the house and alert children to every mundane detail of their parents' day: when they get in and out of bed, sit on the sofa, open the refrigerator door or turn on the air conditioning.
ResCare's Taylor says all of the research and startup companies are driven by this simple equation.
"At the same time that we have this huge population of aging folks, we have a shrinking population of caregivers, of younger people able to provide the care that these older people are going to need," she says.
"If we don't find other ways [to do that], then we are really going to be in big trouble in the future.
"Back in Savannah, Colleen scoops out some extra banana pudding for her parents as she chats with Cady on the monitor.
"I was going to leave the whole dish, but I thought better of it," Colleen says.Cady laughs.
"It would be gone by tomorrow morning, I'm telling ya!
"Colleen says she assumed video monitoring would help keep her parents healthy and at home.
But she had no idea it would also provide her parents with a new friend.
"You see how old people are just lonely," she says.
"This makes Momma and Daddy happy.
"And Colleen admits that it relieves her own guilt at not being around even more.As her parents keep talking with Cady, Colleen packs up the dishes, shouts out a goodbye and heads for the door.
She leaves her parents for the night, reassured that they're not really alone.
*                   *                   *                       *                    *                     *                       The new technology helps Colleen's parents to age well in their home.
They retain independence and have another connection to someone.
It also helps Coleen feel less stress.
A win, win.
More Tuesday.
(I'm postponing the intended Aging, Appearance and Fall Fashion until Saturday.)
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 21, 2010>
Having money helps when we're trying to help parents age well.
"Aging Veterans and their Spouses" (June 1, 2010), focusing on a friend's 90+ year-old mother (a WWI veteran's widow) and the Aid and Attendance Pension benefit, attracted many viewers.
Next The Wall Street Journal (August 2010) wrote about the Aid and Attendance Pension (called "the pension").
To help aging parents who may qualify, I've selected websites and blogs that can untangle and clarify needed information and help families with aging parents gain new insights into how this program may work for them.
Start with my June post (if you haven't read it).
I include links and my annotations from that site as well as other sites and blogs.
My June post: http://helpparentsagewell.com/2010/06/01/962/Department of Veteran's Affairs Information provides concrete information about the pension:  http://www.vba.va.gov/bln/21/pension/vetpen.htmhttp://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703824304575435932585741218.html  In an excellent, comprehensive article, the Wall Street Journal, reports on this being an underused program, with available funds; and provides specific financial information with helpful examples.http://www.rightathome.net/blog/government-program-pays-family-members/ --an informative, detailed 2009 post about the the pension, spells out everything.
But you might skip everything following the recommendation for the "How to Apply for the Veterans Aid and Attendance Pension Benefit" book, either because it's repeated on the following book site or it discusses "Veteran's Benefits Advisors," which carries a cautionary note on the blog and in the Wall Street Journal article.http://www.longtermcarelink.net/a16Veterans_standard_book.htm --site with the excellent, instructive How to Apply book.
Includes testimonial letter from a book purchaser who followed the directions and received the pension benefits within a month.http://www.underhilllaw.com/veterans-benefits: my friend found this firm helpful with the paperwork.
(I don't know if she knew about the How to Apply book.
)For further advice about applying on your own, check out: www.veteransaidbenefit.org, which is illegal to reproduce without permission.
So paste the website into your browser, then go to #11 "When the Family Can Submit a Claim Without Help.
"Love, sensitivity, caring and a lot of information go into helping parents age well.
Obviously extra money, if available, helps too.
Let me know how this works for you and your comments can help others (if comments don't work, e-mail my gmail: helpagingparents@gmail.com).
And/or go to my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com where posts are more professionally published without problems. 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 18, 2010>
Six Suggestions to Help Aging Parents Through the Shorter Days of Autumn and the Short, Dark Days of Winter Why?
Just as sunshine usually raises our spirits, the arrival of autumn (on Wednesday) with less sun, cooler weather, falling leaves, and ultimately barren trees and dark days has the opposite effect on many.
To help parents age well with a positive attitude, six suggestions follow.
1.
Structure things so aging parents--especially those who are homebound--have daily connections with family and friends (old friends, new friends, your childhood friends who are still in contact with your parents, clergy).
It can help avoid the doldrums or get them out of a "funk."
2.
Arrange for letters, notes, faxes, e-mails (hard copies can be shared with friends and reread), phone calls, Skype to arrive daily.
Fax and e-mail take little time, require no conversation, yet bring stimulation to aging parents along with the knowledge that someone is thinking about them.
(Great for adult children.)
3.
Remember that "carrots," plans to do something at a future date, give aging parents something to think about and look forward to.
4.
Asking advice in a phone call, e-mail etc.
doesn't happen so much any more with older people.
To be asked reinforces self-esteem--feelings of being able to contribute, of being needed.
5.
Sharing appropriate personal thoughts and feelings--with or without asking for input--is flattering (enhances self-esteem) and inclusive.
6.
Discussing news and exchanging ideas is stimulating.
And who doesn't like gossip?
The highly regarded 1987 MacArthur Foundation Study of Aging in America (along with other studies) identifies social connectedness as one of the three most important factors in successful aging.
The more people in an aging person's life, the better.
So for older people--especially if they live in the north--there are dreary months ahead and connections with others become even more important.
They provide stimulation.
They help older people combat feelings of isolation, loneliness, and depression.
And that makes our life easier too.
In addition, an elderly person's feeling that he or she matters--that someone cares--is priceless.
And isn't that a big part of what helping parents age well is all about.Please visit my .com:  http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 14, 2010>
Unless it's an emergency, simply deciding to take a major step to help parents age well often takes time.
And once the decision is made, additional time may be necessary before an aging parent receives help.
My July 17th post, "Aging Parents, Best Hospitals, 16 Specialties, 5 Reasons to Consider Them," encouraged at least one adult child to make an appointment at Mt.
Sinai, ranked #1 in geriatrics.
Her email: Hi Susan, Just wanted to let you know that it took a while to get my mother (age 90) an appointment at the Martha Stewart Living Center at Mt.
Sinai Hospital but it was well worth the wait.
Her evaluation was quite thorough.
It took over two hours.
Some of her medications were changed; the geriatrician recommended that she start physical therapy again; and consulted with her primary physician.
Today I visited her and asked her how she was feeling with her new medications.
She said she no longer felt "foggy" and "sleepy" and that this new drug helped the chronic pain she was feeling.
What was this drug?
Tylenol!
It replaced the potent pain killer she had been taking.
Thank you for bringing this geriatric clinic to my attention.
We go back for a follow-up in a few months.
Karen PS.
She loved the geriatrician who treated her with such respect and interest.
He paid attention to everything she said, did not rush and really treated her like a person.
It was so wonderful for me to see her treated so well.
Dear Karen, Thank you for sharing your--and your mother's--experience.
It sounds like it may often be necessary to wait for an appointment.
That's helpful to know.
And it's wonderful to know that your elderly mother is feeling alert, has less pain and "loved" the geriatrician.
Susan *                 *                   *                    *                      * Because many caring children with aging parents are on fast forward and overload, it's understandable that we put off initiating certain things that may help our parents--until it's a crisis.
It sounds like Karen didn't wait for a crisis.
So like Karen, we may save our parents discomfort and ourselves precious time if we just "do it."
Visit my .com site at: http://helpparentsagewell.com
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 11, 2010>
Last Saturday's post provided a checklist list to answer Pat's question about where to find aging parents' important information.
Her parents were very elderly, still took trips, so I assume she was thinking about one of the "what ifs" we all think about when we try to help parents age well: "What If Something Happens While They're Away?
"....a list equally appropriate for far-away-living children who feel/have major responsibility for helping their aging parents.That said, there are many checklists you can Google, focusing on elderly care, end-of-life planning, financial planning, home safety, legal, problems to look for, questions to ask doctors, what to look for in assisted living arrangements... to name some.The checklist from last Saturday plus the ones below provide comprehensive information for us as we try to do our best to help relatively healthy, independent-living, aging parents age well.
(FYI--Interestingly, my last Saturday's checklist is the only one I've found that mentions "computer passwords" and "PINS.
")I particularly like the two sites below.
Upon clicking the 2nd site, you will be asked to click "plain html," after which the document will appear-- initially the documents on both sites begin somewhat far down on the screen.Caring for an Aging Parent Checklist (Henderson Group) is on the first Google page for "help aging parents checklist.
"On the third Google page is:http://docs.google.com/viewer?a=v&q=cache:2Qg7W6-lLwAJ:www.stayathomecare.net/doc/Checklistforlovedones2010.pdf+aging+parents+checklist&hl=en&gl=us&pid=bl&srcid=ADGEESj510
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 7, 2010>
The "12 Things Children of Aging Parents Should Know" post, assumes parents feel able to give up some control.
It also assumes discussing wills and things pertaining to end of life will help aging parents and their adult children because of the practicality, even if it's not pleasant.Part of the aging process involves a lessening of control that's out of an older person's control.
But older people can keep a significant amount of control if they make the effort.
Thus, not divulging PINs and where bank accounts, valuables etc.
are kept may be a matter of not wanting to relinquish control.For some, discussing anything pertaining to their mortality is off-limits.
Period.
(No problem.
We give a solution at the end of this post.)
But isn't it interesting that, in an era when so many subjects are freely discussed, end-of-life issues remain awkward--even taboo--for many in both generations.Our senior advisor, psychiatrist Dr.
Bud, explains: "It can be superstition--fear that talking about end-of-life issues can put a hex, cast a spell, or cause something to happen.
Some shun this kind of conversation also because it stirs up fear of death.
"Adult children, not their aging parents, may stonewall attempts to talk about planning for the last stage of life.
They don't want to think about their parents dying.
They can be in denial about the predictability of death, resist anything that hints at parents' death--even to the point that they don't want to accept a special heirloom-type gift or piece of art that elderly parents want to give their children to enjoy during their lifetime.To help parents age well throughout the lifespan using the information listed in the "12 Things" post will save caring children time and stress.
If the information is not forthcoming during a parent's lifetime, however, our senior advisor attorney suggests that parents write a letter, explaining the location of those 12 important things.The letter's envelope stating "Not to be opened until my death" should be kept with other important documents.
There's the solution.Although not as helpful as having the information while parents are living, such a letter will help aging parents ultimately make their children's lives easier; and will help adult children to better carry out their parents' wishes.
Please go to my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same blog, more information and the spacing works.
The spacing here is not fixable.
I will soon be moving to the .com blog for good.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 4, 2010>
Pat writes: Is there a list somewhere of all the important information you should have as your parents age?
Like where they keep their will, where the household papers are, etc.
Thanks.
Dear Pat, The list below highlights 12 important pieces of information children of aging parents should have when trying to help parents age well.
Some may be immediately useful; some helps in emergencies, and some enables an easier transition at the end of life.
This list was compiled with the help of my senior advisors including an attorney and 86-year-old Arline, since I know of no existing list.
It should save a great deal of stress at critical times when trying to help aging parents.
Specifically children should know: 1.
Where legal documents: power of attorney, health care proxy, living will, and will are kept.
Our senior advisor attorney points out the lawyer--as well as parents-- should have these documents.
He explains that if parents have used a lawyer who's in a law firm, that firm should have copies of the documents whether or not the lawyer who drew them up is still there.
An individual practicing lawyer may have moved around and could be harder to locate.
Then ditto for the documents.
2.
Location of bank account(s)  3.
Location of safety deposit box(es) and key(s)  4.
Location of other keys  5.
Hiding place of any valuables  6.
Names/phone #'s,/ fax #'s of significant professionals: attorney, physician(s), financial advisor, parents' close friends as well as people who help in a variety of ways (ie.
cleaning person, companion).
Our attorney points out that hospitals, for example, accept faxes of powers of attorney, health care proxies etc., if a scanner is not practical and you don't bring the document in on your own.
7.
PIN and Passwords in order to communicate with any company that requires them in order to communicate with you (think bills, Medicare).
8.
Where computer passwords are kept  9.
Where checkbook and bills are kept 10.
Medication list--up-to-date (Tuesday's post).
Note: a reader e-mailed "A very good idea about laminating your meds.
Every time I go to a doctor's office, they always ask me for my meds and dosages and I'll be damned if I can remember...."
11.
Veterinarian (should pet need care or boarding).
12.
Parents' wishes regarding end of life (funeral, final resting place) *                            *                           *                         *                          * We can help aging parents and make it easier for ourselves when we have these 12 key pieces of information.
And thank you, Pat, for asking for a list!
Go to my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same post, additional information and resources.     
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 31, 2010>
My physician told me she is suggesting all of her patients do the following.
Should there be an emergency this can certainly help aging parents, as well as all adult children, who depend on a medication to remain healthy First: On a piece of paper the size of a driver's license, write (or set the computer to that size, then print) the names and dosages of all medications.
Use front and back of paper if necessary.
And--if room-- you can * those taken once a day or write 1xdaily, 2xdaily etc.
Second: take the driver's-license-size paper to be laminated.
Fedex-Kinko's and Staples have laminating equipment... check the "copy center" or "photo" area.
Cost seems to be between 99 cents and $1.25, but may vary depending where you live.
Third: place laminated medication card in wallet, behind the driver's license or --if parent no longer drives--behind the ID card.
In the event of an accident, the first thing people look for is ID.
The medication list will be in full sight as the ID is pulled out.
Most parents depend on a medication to prevent health problems.
Assuming no cognitive impairment, most know the names and dosages.
Some aging parents wear a medical bracelet with necessary information.
Many do not.
This laminated list is added insurance in our efforts to help parents age well and avoid potential problems.
It can help us too!
Go to my new site: helpparentsagewell.com.
Easier reading, more information.                        
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 28, 2010>
A No Doubt Often-Repeated Scene as Adult Children Try to Help  Aging Parents Change Living Situations An elderly well-dressed, frail-looking mother in a wheel chair.
An  adult daughter getting snacks at the airport before boarding a plane.
Apologies about the mother's wheelchair blocking access to the cash  register.
My response--not wanting to make the elderly mother feel  bad for causing the 'roadblock'--  "No problem, I'm not in a hurry."
We ended up sitting near each other in the same boarding area to take  the same plane to another state.
Bits of conversation.
Had the mother  and daughter been vacationing  in San Diego?
Question directed at the  mother.
"No, she's coming to live nearer me and my sister,"  answered  the daughter.
Additional conversation disclosed that the mother had lived in the  San Diego area since she was a teenager.
Dismantling her home was a  major job; a moving van was transporting her furniture to an assisted  living facility.
The daughter then busied herself with something.
Her  mother sat quiety in the wheel chair.
I read my magazine.
I don't know  what made me glance up and look towards the mother and daughter again  but I thought I saw the elderly mother's lip quivering.
Later, after boarding the plane and beginning the walk to my seat, I  glimpsed the daughter sitting by the window--looking out.
Her elderly  mother sat next to her in an aisle seat, looking down at her lap--a tear  running down her cheek.
My friend  Katy's observation, made several years ago, leaped from my  memory bank.
"It's like pulling a flower in the garden up by the  roots."
P.S.
Katy helped her parent age well in her own home until she died in her 90's.
Please check out my other, more readable site: http://www.helpparentsagewell.com/ --with more "bells and whistles"--to see this post.  
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 24, 2010>
While on vacation, my writing time is very limited and access to wireless is ify at best.
Never-the-less, this week and next, I will try to post on schedule (Tuesdays and Saturdays) if possible.
Tonight I'm wondering: Why do we see zillions (slight exaggeration) of adult children pushing all types of strollers at the San Diego Zoo, but very few aging parents (or even adult children pushing wheelchairs with seated aging parents) enjoying the attractions that zoos offer?
Is it that an aging or old parent no longer enjoys this?
We've been invited to stay with friends at the beach in the San Diego area.
Walking barefoot in the sand and putting feet in the ocean feels good!
So does breathing the fresh air.
And sunsets on the Pacific ocean are magnificent (see  photo in August 17th's post).
But I want to talk about Balboa Park and the San Diego Zoo in Balboa Park, which we visited today.
Just minutes from downtown San Diego by way of the freeway (if it isn't loaded with traffic), this park is a visual treat, with acres of amazing vegetation, wonderful landscaping and beautifully designed buildings (many housing exhibits) from a bygone era.
Simply driving through the acres of park is a memorable experience .
The zoo, however, is the major attraction for us.
With top professional attention given to endangered species, conservation, natural habitats, the latest in animal care, and no doubt more animals than any other zoo in the US, it's in a class by itself.
AND it's user-friendly to every age.
Wheel chairs, strollers and some kind of little motorized vehicles, along with trams and gondolas make the entire zoo accessible.
But be forewarned: because every animal from A-Z can be seen in its natural habitat, if our goal is to  help aging parents by giving them a fun outing, it's important to know the limits of parents' energy.
Thus, it's necessary to prioritize what's of most interest (there are plenty of friendly, workers and volunteers who can help you).
I've learned 3 hours is my max, but as little as an hour at the San Diego Zoo can be a highlight for young and old if it's well planned.
Check weather, go early to beat the heat in summer, take handicapped parking permit and bring or buy water on a hot day.
Remember: aging parents often don't feel thirsty, but dehydration is dangerous.
To help aging parents, who like nature and animals, have an outing they'll always remember, plan a trip to the San Diego Zoo if it's doable.
Help!
Aging Parents will soon move to its new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com  Check it out.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 21, 2010>
         Two Suggestions Can Help Aging Parents Walk With Confidence"If you don't use it, you lose it."
Sound familiar?
When fear of falling undermines parents' confidence to walk.... what happens?
Less exercise.
Muscles weaken.
Potential weight gain.
Basically nothing good--as we know.
And the problem is compounded when vanity prevents an aging parent from using a recommended cane or walker.
I noticed a shopper with her cane in the shopping cart at the grocery store the other day.
I thought about my mother whose tia's and falls made her walk with uncertainty, except when she went grocery shopping and could push a shopping cart like everybody else.
When adult children can take parents grocery shopping, it's a win-win.
Everyone gets needed groceries and children can rest assured that parents have ample, healthy food.
(Sorry, shopper picture disappeared--it's on my new site--see end of post) 1.
Find stores where shoppers use shopping carts.
The weight of the cart adds enormous stability, which promotes confidence to walk around like everyone else, minus the pervasive fear of falling that accompanies so many older people when they walk.
While the grocery store is the most obvious place shopping carts are used, check out--to name a few-- Target, Costco, Home Depot, TJ Max, Marshalls, many major pet supply stores, some toy stores... Once accustomed to looking, we notice more opportunities and taking parents can make for a fun outing.
2.
Think twice before using aging parents' handicapped parking permits when going out with them.
When parents can walk and need exercise, it might not be in their best interest to use the handicapped parking space.
Why?
Because there are ways to have them walk with you that instill confidence, while giving them opportunities to walk further and feel "normal."
Walk arm-in-arm: Marie, a sturdy-on-her-feet octogenarian, was overheard offering her less-sturdy-on-her-feet friend her arm, saying "Do you like chicken?
Grab a wing."
Walking arm-in-arm shouldn't be a big deal.
It happens naturally with men and women all the time.
For extra support: with your parent's arm in yours, move your elbow in towards your hipbone so your arm hugs your parent's arm against your body and your hipbone provides additional support.
Done correctly the extra bracing adds to your strength should your parent begin to lose balance and gives your parent an added feeling of stability.
This latter suggestion has the stamp of approval from a highly respected nurse-author-geriatric care manager to whom I demonstrated this method.
She likes it because she says you aren't pulling or leading your parent (which is usually the case).
As we look for ways to help parents age well, check it out.
Go for a walk with your parent.
For additional excellent information click  http://nihseniorhealth.gov/, the National Institute on Aging site, then click F (see Falls and Older Adults).
This site is a terriric resource for older people.
Visit my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com  the spacing is correct, view photo, and click a tab--perhaps "blogs and sites I like."
The site is almost completed
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 17, 2010>
Sunset  Pacific Ocean  Seaside, Oregon WHERE?
The Coast--The Shore When it's less than an hour and a half ride (usually doable for older people who may even sleep part of the way), a drive to the coast offers a change of scenery.
Some say the sea air wets the appetite.
No doubt fresh fish and clam chowder help.
Beach towns: attract people of all ages, usually have an abundance of restaurants, interesting shops, and places to stay.
Even the smallest, quietest towns have a favorite eating spot.
Sticking a toe in the water, or walking barefoot in the sand--independently or on your arm--can be an added bonus for parents.
Old-timers said saltwater was good for feet.
Breathing the fresh air is another plus.
InlandThe options to help aging parents have a change of scenery are only limited by time and interest.
Destinations to places of quiet and beauty, charming towns, museums, vineyards, or a ride in the country--are among the possibilities.
Lakes, rivers, mountains, and national parks offer so much natural beauty, with picnic tables at most places of scenic interest and/or dining in nearby small towns.
Major attractions like Multnomah Falls in the West (Columbia River Highway out of Portland, Oregon), may have a good restaurant (check to see if reservations are advised).
Touristy or not these natural attractions take people "out of themselves" and into what's real.
Clearly a change for aging parents who are inside most of the time and appreciate (or once appreciated) nature.
Driving with my parents to small towns they used to frequent near their home but didn't get to any more, was a welcome outing.
And some towns, like the historic towns in New England, they loved.
There are well-known towns like Saratoga, NY (pretty town, famous horse racing track) that, depending on where parents live, can be a short outing to a popular destination.
Simply driving around those towns and having lunch or a midday meal, helps parents age well...gives them something to think and talk about for a long time.
Small museums in New England: The Clark's (www.clarkart.edu) world class paintings in Williamstown, Mass., the Norman Rockwell Museum (www.nrm.org) in Stockbridge, Mass.
and the Bennington Museum (www.benningtonmuseum.org) in Vermont with its Grandma Moses collection, are gems.
The latter should be uplifting.
Grandma Moses was still painting at 100.
Check out my new site: http:helpparentsagewell.com.
It's almost complete.
Same post, same  photo (which upset the layout and spacing when I uploaded it here), plus tabs with more information.. 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 14, 2010>
Dementia, Mobility-Challenged, 90 year-old Sisters Meet After Two Years for a Summer OutingWhat better to enrich a parent's summer than a change of scenery!Two cousins arrange for their elderly mothers (90 and 96), living two hours apart, to meet for lunch half-way between the cities where they live.
One mother is mobility challenged, one has dementia.
Sounds like a difficult summer outing; yet I'm told all went very well and the elderly sisters had such a good time.This kind of outing takes special planning plus.
Selecting a quiet location with a nice view, an hour's drive from each sister's residence was key.
It limited driving time to two hours, broken up by lunch.
Tuesday's post suggested parks with picnic tables and restaurants that were handicapped accessible.
Public golf courses with nice dining facilities provide another option.The daughters drove their mothers and each brought along a caregiver to help so everyone could relax more.
The mobility-challenged sister's mind was sharp.
The dementia-afflicted sister can identify everyone in a 50-year-old photo and enjoy what's happening at the moment, but forgets the latter quickly.
A good time was had by all, with the daughters feeling especially happy about the success that their careful planning achieved.While neither sister lived independently, both appreciated being taken out to see new things and have a meal.
And, as we see, "When there's a will there's a way."
Indeed when adult children can help aging parents who are burdened by these major challenges, it's a win-win for everyone involved.So when we know our parents can get out--to see a doctor if nothing else, and if we want to give them a change and add enrichment to their lives--which takes planning and effort--Tuesday's post will provide additional details                .Please go to my blog helpparentsagewell.com   Same blog, with photos and more "bells and whistles."
Last details almost finished.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 10, 2010>
Short Trip Ideas to Help Aging Parents Enjoy a Change of SceneryPart One: General truisms and short outings If parents can get out to have you drive them to the doctor, they can manage these short trips.
A change of scenery adds something to life; we know that.
While we take for granted the many changes of scenery in our every-day-life, older people who don't drive and/or lack initiative often complain they "look at the four walls.
"Feeling "isolated" can make anyone "dumb down," lose interest, feel cranky.Inertia can easily set in--making an effort becomes too much of an effort.Or an invitation may provide a jump start.If an invitation to accompany you doesn't meet with enthusiasm or acceptance, trick them into going.
How?
Using the "I need your help" plea, have them accompany you on a quick errand, then add one of the suggested short trips.
Or attach a short outing after the trip to the doctor's office.Provide something appealing to eat/drink--as simple as an ice cream cone or as elaborate as a meal.
I accidentally learned that next-to-last last truism when I took my--we-thought-almost-dying--mother for her first geriatric appointment at the teaching hospital.
She went in like a limp rag.
After tests and time with the geriatrician we wheeled her to the car, carefully seat-belted her in the back seat, and began the short ride home.
We passed gorgeous rose bushes that mother noticed and quietly commented on.
I asked if she had enough energy for me to drive her past some other homes with beautiful flowers and she said "yes, if you make it short."
Voila!Short Summer Outings: A scenic and relaxing drive.
Final destination could be a place to eat.
Every city and town has a restaurant (sitting in a restaurant provides entertainment--people watching) and parks.
(Check Parks and Recreation Department for picnic tables, other amenities and handicap access if applicable.)
Possible sites: overlooking water, gardens, beautiful views.
Nature is renewing.Major botanical gardens, zoos, and museums often have facilities for lunch as well wheel chairs and are handicap accessible.
Tailor length of visits to parents' needs (which obviously don't include waiting in long lines), so it makes sense to avoid the busy times.Stimulation helps parents age well.
Pulling an unmotivated parent out of a funk is a good feeling.
We need to remember people change, not much.
An unmotivated, cranky young person will no doubt be an unmotivated cranky old person.
We cannot perform miracles--alas!
But when parents feel better, don't we feel better.Please go to my new site   http://helpparentsagewell.com.
You will be able to view the photo that's included in this post.  
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, August 7, 2010>
Doors UnlockedBurglar Alarm OffParents HappyChildren ConcernedNinety-year-old Eloise always left one door unlocked.
Easier for the paramedics to get in if she pushed the button on her alert pendant.
The always-unlocked door worried her children but efforts to have Eloise change her ways were of no avail.Eloise prided herself on hr independence and the fact that she had posted DNR signs in every visible location--should emergency personnel need to come to her home for something serious.And then there was the peeping Tom.
That frightened her and her 50-something year-old children.
Nevertheless she was insistent--she couldn't work the burglar alarm, and needed to keep one door unlocked.
The paramedics had been there before and no doubt would be there again.
What Do the Car and Car Keys Have to do With This?
If your parents are like mine were--and experienced the emergency vehicles, sirens etc.
responding to their push of the burglar alarm company's button, they didn't want to go through it again unless they were dying.
"The whole neighborhood was awakened.
It was embarrassing."
Yet an acceptable alternative exists.
Note the red panic button on the remote device that enables us to lock and unlock our car from afar.
We've heard the awful noise pushing that panic button creates.
What's better for frightening off a would-be intruder?
(OK, I admit-- possibly an old person with "the shakes" pointing a loaded shot gun.)
Also a car in the driveway is a deterrent--signaling people of driving age are home.
(One of our non-driving senior advisors has kept the car.)
So taking the car away from non-driving parents may not be a good idea when we're trying to help them age well and give them protection.
(Note: leaving the key may be unnecessary; the remote is necessary.)
Additionally, keeping the keys and remote in a place that's easy to reach from the bed at night and in an easy-to-get-to place  (a pocket) when out of the home, makes the panic button a great asset for fending off bad people--at home, in parking lots--anywhere near the car.
*             *            * Sorry about the spacing.
Please go to http://helpparentsagewell.com to view this blog (and the picture that belongs with it) correctly.  
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, August 3, 2010>
Is it Better for Us or Better for Them?This is not about the life and death of an aging parent; but then again, it is.
Our 18-year-old cat was a parent of four before she came under our care--a stray one-year-old, who we found struggling to get suet we'd hung from a limb for the birds during the March 1983 blizzard.
She came fleetingly and sporadically at first--to eat chicken I put out for her--and ultimately worked her way into our garage, our home, and our hearts.
She was fiercely independent; resisted any obvious help we tried to give for many years.
Didn't want  Inclement weather or not, she wanted no help from us.
She enjoyed roaming around our property but was accustomed to handling her own affairs.
Only the food did she accept, but not if she thought we were watching (which we did through a window).
As she aged, her needs gradually changed.
She gradually accepted more from us, on her terms of course.
Protection from other animals, who sometimes ate her food, sent her into our heated garage when we put her food there.
A cat door enabled her to come and go at will.
And in winter she jumped up on a box near the radiator, where we immediately added a carpet remnant for her comfort.
She kept us at arms' length but obviously knew we were there for her.
When her life and limb were threatened after a cat fight, we trapped her and took her to the vet's.
He suggested she might be better as an indoor cat in another home--my husband and I took that to mean he thought I was a bad mother.
But we knew this cat well.
We tried putting her food in our kitchen.
Not one paw would cross the threshold unless we left the back door to the outside or the door to the garage open for a quick get-away.
She was miserable cooped up.
When another cat found the cat door and thus our cat's food, she became secure eating in the kitchen with any door to the outside closed--until she was finished eating whereupon she meowed to leave.
And of course, we complied.
During another bad winter three or four years ago, she decided to explore the main floor of our home and ended up sleeping on the carpet in front of a floor to ceiling window.
It was then--at age thirteen or fourteen--that she started to become a house cat.
While she spent as much time as she could outside, she came in to eat and sleep and began to let us pet her on a regular basis.
She expanded her territory in the house until she had been in every room from basement to attic.
She had favorite places to sleep, but never on the furniture.
And catching her for her yearly check-ups at the vet's became less of an ordeal.
We came home one March night and saw her sitting in the living room, looking out the floor to ceiling window.
But she didn't move--didn't hear the door shut it seemed.
We called her name, but she didn't hear that either.
At 18 years of age, we knew some aging event was taking place.
And so we learned she was almost deaf and had kidney failure.
We were told we could give her fluids and it was easy to do.
We tried--it was easy--but it involved holding the cat.
Although she finally loved being petted, she never liked being held.
And she evaded us for days after catching her and doing the fluid routine.
So it came down to: is it better for her to live a little longer, feeling threatened by us that she would be given fluids; or should she live less long and feel secure.
I thought back to a friend's 90-something-year old mother who liked to have a drink or two but wasn't allowed because of a medication---whereupon she stopped the medications.
When her child (my friend) asked my opinion, I put the question to her to answer.
Live longer or live happier?
Her mother continued to drink and lived a very long life.
My friend helped her parent age well.
We watched out for our cat for 17 years.
She died just outside the door to our bedroom the other night.
And now she's gone--leaving an unimaginable sadness.
When you put a lot into something, it means a lot to you.
And when you put even more than a lot into something, over time it penetrates and infiltrates every fiber of your being.
Those who are dedicated caregivers know this.
We help aging parents; we help aging pets.
And it's very hard to say goodbye-- even when we've done our best and feel good that we let her (in this case) live life and ultimately leave life her way.
*                          *                            *                       Comments below not working again.
Nor is font size.
Click on helpagingparents@gmail.com  to comment....or go to my new site: http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same blog and posts, added tabs, comments space works as do my replies, still needs my photo--we're working on that.  
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, July 30, 2010>
New York Times, July 29, 2010   Heading:"Monitoring Mom and Dad."
Caption beneath heading:"HOME TECH  New products for aging in place.
""Big Brother,"--well actually grown children--adult brothers (and sisters) using technology to keep track of their aging parents' every--well almost every--move??
From afar?According to yesterday's NY Times Home section, the technology to do just that is here.
And the rationale for using it seems to be that it provides an option for older parents to age in place instead of in assisted living.
Why?
Because their children have the ability to monitor important specifics of parents' daily activities when at home.
Much less expensive than assisted living.
And can make children feel better connected.
"Aging in Place," and making cities more "senior friendly" are important aspects of Tuesday's post.
And yesterday's Home section articles are so relevant, I'm writing this post a day early.
The NY Times Home section's articles, understanding that most people want to age in their homes, introduces what will undoubtedly become big business: technology to help older people stay in their homes longer, even with issues that would normally signal "assisted living."
This could be another breakthrough to not only help aging parents, but to help them age well.I already have an email saying that Rye, NY's aging in place program is called "Sprye in Rye."
I'm wondering how the Spry Rye Seniors view these articles and the various technological devices that keep an eye on seniors.Link to the first article, then link to the technology article and tell us what you think.
*                      *                      *Note: You can now, I think, make comments on this blog.
However, my replies don't work.
And while I don't like to abandon an old lover (blogspot) and although it's not quite ready, visit my new site http://helpparentsagewell.com.
Same blog, the comments and replies work, more bells and whistles, only photos and finishing touches remain to be done.
I'd hoped to wait until everything was finished before asking you to switch over, but perhaps the time has come, especially if you want to read timely replies to your comments.
that said--Reply to Inger      Thank you for your comment on Tuesday's post.
"Adult day care" is clearly another option to help parents age in place, although I've never liked that term, do you?
It seems diminishing--as if similar to child day care and doggie day care.
Wouldn't it be great if there was a more dignified term?
Yet my post today features "monitoring" parents from afar, which can also feel diminishing to anyone with pride.
Bottom line: when something's mutually agreed upon (not forced upon) by parents and children it's a win-win.
Good luck in your important work.
Stay in touch.
Susan
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 27, 2010>
"Fast-Paced New York, Promising Safety and Comfort to Elderly"--NY Times-July 19, 2010Where are the best living options for seniors?and  What and are the best living options for seniors?Different strokes for different folks, right?
In our efforts to help parents age well, who knows-- based on things one can control--what will be best to help aging parents live out their lives.A city A small townA place in a sunny climate One's home/apartment (aging in place)Living with children or relatives A retirement /adult communityAn independent living situationAssisted livingToday I learned that a healthy, single woman in her 80's, left suburban N.Y. to move to a  retirement community, in a small town with a highly regarded college.
Well-educated, intelligent and with no family ties,  she dedicated herself to searching out an affordable, appropriate option with the  stimulation a college community offers; and found it 1,000 miles away.Similarly Dad often told me that when he and mother "got  old" he wanted to live in a college community--a small town with  the energy and stimulation that youth (and college students) provide.
He didn't want to be where everyone was old and getting  old.
No senior living for him.
Mother, typical of that generation, followed Dad's lead.He and Mother never went to that idealized small town.
Yet he "aged in place" with help after Mother's death, when "aging in place" was a relatively new concept.
Dad happily and proudly lived and died in the original home he and mother had built some 60 years ago, in a neighborhood bustling with young families.
He knew everyone and they knew him.R.
(see sidebar) at 96 remains in her home of 60+ years,.
She continues to age in place with a cleaning person for half a day, every other week.
Clearly the oldest person on her street, many of the young families think of her as a family member.
They are supportive.
She treasures the friendships and independence.
Kiplinger's Personal Finance article, "THERE'S NO PLACE LIKE HOME," informs us that the majority of people 60 and older prefer to grow old in their homes and their communities, according to an AARP survey.
And a wide range of services is available to help them stay there.
While "pricey," we learn the services are cheap compared to the monthly cost of an assisted-living facility.
Living in cities like New York (or other major cities with vibrant downtowns) provide seniors who enjoy city life almost everything.
To my way of thinking, living in a New York apartment building is the best old age home.
Reasons: Young and old live in the building It's not isolatingThe superintendent fixes whatever needs fixing  Meals/food can be ordered and brought to the doorman.
Someone will get it to you if/when necessaryDriving is unnecessary.
Public transportation (bus, subway, taxi)--while facing cuts in service due to this economy--makes everything accessibleStores, restaurants, entertainment, culture etc.
are nearbyVery sick?
The doorman can call a taxi, help you in it, and send it and you to the hospital of your choice.True, every building doesn't have a doorman, but you get the idea.The article following the NY Times headline at the beginning of this post discusses New York's initial efforts and well-thought-out  steps to make it "age friendly" for senior citizens.
For example, the  traffic signals at over 400 intersections have been extended 4 seconds  making it easier for older people to get to the other side before the  light changes.
Portland,  Oregon and Cleveland were other cities cited as becoming more  "aging-oriented" (my term).
I know of an apartment building in Portland for seniors, close to downtown and transportation that has dining facilities.
There are undoubtedly others.
If you know of others please e-mail my gmail.Living options for seniors have expanded far beyond old age homes and may be less expensive than assisted living even when using some added services.
Taking the time to check things out will clearly help parents age well.Also check out this blog on my new site--nearing completion with added "bells and whistles"--and it takes comments!  
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 24, 2010>
Do we help aging parents by becoming parents to our parents, especially  when they are of sound mind?
Are we supporting feelings  of control and independence--feelings that help parents age well?
In this past Tuesday's post family members basically took over--either to persuade or make a unilateral decision regarding very serious health care for aging parents.
That made me pause.
In the first example, the stroke victim was not able to advocate for herself initially.
Someone had to step in if the outcome was to be any better than the ultimate nursing home option her doctor envisioned.
She was never left out of the loop, however.
She knew the reason for each action, presented in a way that offered hope--so she wouldn't lose the will to fight to regain as much normalcy as possible.
In the second example, family members put great pressure on the colon cancer relative.
While not feeling well, and do doubt having countless thoughts about well-being, comfort, life and death (to name a few), the relative was of sound mind and did see the merits of getting a second opinion....even if it meant a long plane ride.As we impart information and try to help older and aging parents accept our advice and recommendations, we have a better chance of success when we pull them in psychologically to work with us--assuming they are mentally capable.
And it seems to me, even when they don't seem mentally capable, keeping them in the loop at the least shows respect and at the most could possibly activate something positive from within.With that in mind, having called attention to best hospitals and best specialty departments, it makes sense to realize not everyone will/can take advantage.
As a fall-back position--or even a front-line position--it makes sense to know which are the best hospitals in aging parents' and grandparents' hometowns.To fill this need the Hospital Quality Alliance, run by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, run a website:http://data.medicare.gov/ According the AARP's June 2010 bulletin, it  measures and records patients' outcomes from local hospitals.The site links to different sections that compare hospitals, tell you how patients with certain conditions fared after hospital care, whether they had to be readmitted within 30 days, and the death rates in certain cases.
The quality of care they received during a recent stay is also provided from answers to a survey.
Only hospitals that have agreed to release this information to the public are included in this government data site.In answer to: "I just moved to a new area.
How can I find out which hospitals are considered the best in town?"
the AARP Bulletin's "Ask the Experts" section provided the above information.
Seniors obviously care, but may not know where/how to find this information.Add this to the objective information that adult children might want to provide to help their parents age well.
lt's good information to have when aging parents decide to move; and may even figure into a decision about where to move.
And of course it helps prevent having to scramble for hospital information during an emergency.  
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 20, 2010>
When  there's a serious medical emergency it's probably safe to say few aging parents live near a hospital specializing in whatever caused the emergency.
Most of us--even those who live near and help aging parents--don't know the particular specialties at hospitals located nearby.
A sudden emergency may leave little time to do the homework.Three no doubt common scenarios follow, involving different situations and actions taken.
All happened in my family; all caused great concern; all turned out well.
All present strategies to help parents age well.#1--Mother's stroke experience: initially memorable for the emotional stress; equally memorable for the relief and sense of some control we felt, once we found out--and got her to a place-- where she could obtain appropriate treatment.It began with phone call.
Parents in California for the winter.
Mother's speech sounded "funny."
Phoned my brother with concerns and a plea to fly to California immediately if possible (he was moving into a new home that day).
He got there quickly, phoned saying Mother was on her way to the hospital.
I should fly out asap.When I arrived at Mother's bedside her speech was still garbled.
Dinner was on a tray.
She was eating the food with her hands.
I've forgotten other details.
A  terrific nurse updated me and said Mother's physician would be in early the next morning with test results.
We learned they had limited the "damage;" there was nothing more they could do.
Mother could go home later that day or the next with a caregiver, or go to a nursing home.
Dad would be unable to manage her care alone... a nursing home would be in inevitable at some point.I knew I needed time to think.
Decided I wouldn't get a caregiver for that day.
Knew Mother was safe spending another night in the hospital.
I called a NY friend knowledgeable about medicine.
After some research, he phoned back.
He said to get her out of that hospital, which lacked neurology expertise, and to a neurologist at UCLA asap, and gave me a phone number.
With great difficulty I got an out-patient appointment for the next day.The next morning we picked Mother up at the hospital and drove to UCLA with films and reports.
UCLA had newer technology.
New films were taken.
The extent of the damage was clearly pin-pointed and Mother was given different medications, a prescription for physical therapy, and an appointment to return in a month.There have been many advances in stroke treatment since.
I know Mother benefited from some because the neurologist said some were not widely used yet.
I also know: a month later the improvement was so dramatic most people wouldn't have known she'd had a stroke.
Nor did she have any further strokes.
*             *            *#2.
A family member, also living in the west, was diagnosed with colon cancer there... advanced: stage 3--maybe close to 4.
Treatment was about to begin.
"Not there," said my husband, who wanted to check Sloan-Kettering and knew we could be supportive if the family member came back.
Indeed Sloan-Kettering had top colon cancer people.
Convincing someone to come all the way to NY, however, isn't easy.
It's easier when offered as "leaving no stone unturned"--making the trip to get a second opinion.
That works.While chronic health issues complicated things, Sloan-Kettering took charge: a top oncologist; an 8+ hour surgery performed by a top surgeon (who had done this countless times); a while to recuperate in NY.
Instructions for additional "whatever" were given to the doctors in the west.
Routine check-up visits show the surgery was a success.....and we think insurance covered everything.
*                 *                 *#3.
Then there was Dad's "heart event" in California shortly after his 76th birthday.
At the movies he began feeling dizzy.
He went to the theater lobby and sat down on the floor.
One of the personnel came over to see if he was alright.
He wasn't; his blood pressure was low.
Paramedics were called.
He was taken to the hospital where his internist practiced.
While it wasn't the right hospital for my mother, it had a first-rate heart team whose surgeon did heart surgery on a former president a few years later.
Dad had 5 bypasses on a Friday and went home the next Wednesday.
He aged well, lived to be 94, and his death was not heart-related.So how do we generalize?
When helping aging parents is a part of our life and our parents live long enough, the odds of serious medical problems necessitating hospitalization are great.
Getting parents to a hospital with the appropriate highly experienced specialists, can up the odds for a successful result that helps parents continue to age well...and medical insurance may make it more affordable than one might think. 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 17, 2010>
 Mt.
Sinai Hospital Ranked #1 in Geriatrics--2010-2011Mt.
Sinai Hospital's Geriatrics Department, started by Dr. Robert Butler in 1982, (last Tuesday's post) was ranked #1 this week in the latest US News & World Report's "Best Hospitals" issue (August 2010).
An additional 49 hospitals' geriatric departments complete the list.
Fifteen other specialty departments are also ranked.
And Johns Hopkins Hospital ranks #1 as the top hospital in the country--having 15 of the 16 specialties ranking at or near the top.
US News & World Report compiles this list every year (and has done so for over 20 years) "to guide patients who need an unusually high level of hospital care" (which includes high-risk patients).
Isn't this of enormous benefit to help aging parents?
Life takes on a more delicate balance as people age.
Making  well-informed decisions ups the odds in our efforts to help parents age  well.
5 reasons to consider the best hospitals' specialties to help aging parents  Approximately the same time is involved, be it for procedures done in excellent hospitals or less than excellent hospitals; with  excellent doctors or less excellent doctors.
Only the outcomes may be different.
Quality of life is at risk; the more experienced the hospital and medical  professionals are (the more times they've done your parents' needed procedure) the better the odds to have encountered  and handled well unexpected problems.
Older people don't bounce back so  quickly.
Patients lose independence in hospitals.
It's important they gain the confidence to feel some control.
Ideally professionals working in the best hospitals' specialties departments should have done "it" (what ever your parents' medical situation is), worked with "it," handled "it"--over and over and over.
Thus, they instill confidence in you and your parents based on countless experiences with the expected and unexpected.
It takes hard work to recover well from certain procedures.
The skill of the professionals following a procedure is a significant factor; it helps aging parents in their recovery and in regaining a positive outlook.
And it's so important for these senior citizens to push themselves to move forward so they can get back to normal--so the hospital experience doesn't take them down a notch.
And yet--there are  emergencies when we do what we must in a hurry.
And there are times when we know the decisions we make are crucial and we may get only one chance to do it right.
But even then, the professionals in the best hospitals can come to the rescue.
Have you had this experience?
Two true stories will bring the "best hospitals" theme to life in this coming Tuesday's post.
One an emergency (stroke); the other a well-thought out (after arguments and pressure) plan to treat advanced colon cancer.
While not planned at the outset of the each health crisis, the best hospitals figured prominently in both.
In the meantime, US News & World Report is at your newsstand now.
Check out my new site (still needs homepage), same blog, added tabs: http:helpparentsagewell.com  
</doc>
<doc date=Monday, July 12, 2010>
Every aging  parent today and every child with an aging parent today has, I  believe--whether aware of it or not--reaped benefits from Dr. Robert Butler's  work.
He brought the subject of "aging" and an awareness of our biased view ("old geezers") to the forefront in the mid-1970's and worked tirelessly throughout his life to research, impart information, and influence policy that ultimately changed attitudes and the way we support old age.
As we strive to help aging parents, we need to recognize that Dr. Butler pioneered the groundwork to help older people, then created, built and led organizations aimed at helping every senior to age better.
To that end, let me share a personal experience as it  pertained to helping my parents age well.
I remember, probably in the early 80's, a friend telling me about a group who met at Mt.
Sinai Hospital in NY, to talk about aging parents and family members.
I was asked if it interested me.
Of course it did.
I was acutly aware of living far from my parents who were aging and was also sensitive to aging parent/grandparent issues in my counselees' families.
On the other hand, my Helping Children of Divorce book had been accepted for publication and my job at the high school plus family responsibilities made another commitment impossible.
Never-the-less Mt.
Sinai and "aging parents" remained on my radar.
In 1982 Dr. Butler founded the first department of geriatrics at a US medical school (Mt.
Sinai's).
I heard Robert Butler's name again and again.
I also heard the term "geriatrician" but couldn't differentiate it from "gerontologist."
It wasn't until the late 90's when my mother suffered (and recovered from) a stroke, followed by a fall in an unlit movie theater and a difficult recovery, that I understood the difference.
After receiving a phone call that Mother was dying and making long-distance, ultimately successful efforts to change her doctor to a geriatrician at a research/medical school hospital in Oregon, Mother made a miraculous recovery.
Reason: a geriatrician who, among other things arranged to have Mother's catheter removed (it made life easier for the caregivers), and rebalanced her medications (she was small and was taking doses probably appropriate for an NFL tackle).
I was "sold" on having a geriatrician as part of a team to help every medically-needy aging parent in the country.
I subscribed to a Tufts U. health newsletter in 2002 and read in an interview with Richard Bennett, MD, (a Johns Hopkins geriatrician and professor of geriatric medicine) that: "geriatricians have special training in diagnosing older people, whose disease symptoms may differ from those of younger adults...and that they may work harder to treat other problems often dismissed as inevitable (in older people) such as incontinence or memory loss" and that they are often part of a team.
Unfortunately, geriatricians are few in number compared to the aging population.
Reason: becoming a geriatrician requires additional years of training and not many medical schools offer this specialty; Mt.
Sinai of course does.
Reason: $.
Geriatricians make far less than other specialists.
So while the need is great, the number of specialists is small.
The NY Times (July 7, 2010) obituary section published many tributes to Dr. Butler.
I quote from the end of the (Washington DC) Leadership Council of Aging Organizations'  tribute: "Dr. Butler did as much as any leader in our time to advance the cause of protecting and helping older people in America and throughout the world.
His gifts remain beyond his lifetime."
As we try to help our parents age well, we recognize Dr. Butler's gift--to our parents now; to you and me in the future.
For more information check out:  When Do You Need a Geriatrician?, which I find very complete because the writer even "dug up" Dr. Bennett's comments.
Dr. Butler's NY Times obituary   Also take a peek at my new site:http://helpparentsagewell.com  same blog+, (homepage still not finished)
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 10, 2010>
The more we invest ourselves in something--the harder we work at something--the harder it is to let go.
It's also more difficult to see things objectively.
But it's often a part of life as we try to help parents age well.
While some think the aging father discussed last  Saturday is doing just fine, thank you, others have questions.
Some can identify with and understand a devoted daughter's inability to think objectively about the benefits another woman can bring to an aging father's life--especially when she's much younger.
One  adult daughter explains how her older father was revitalized by his relationship with a much younger woman.
From a rather "blah" aging widower, not wanting to leave his apartment unless necessary, he gained energy, loved "to be on the go."
He was like a new person according to this daughter.
They had the younger woman to thank.
Another woman tells of a man in his 80s who lived (unmarried) six years with a woman young enough to be his daughter--until health issues associated with aging began to catch up with him.
The 50-something-year old woman still had many good years ahead and decided she didn't want to be tied down.
The man had six wonderful years with the younger woman, according to this pragmatic woman, years he wouldn't otherwise have had.
She suggests if the devoted daughter can "wait it out" chances are the relationship could dissolve like the one just described.
Easier said than done perhaps.
Other considerations:            As we try to help aging parents it makes sense to ask ourselves "what's the goal?"
Parent's needs/wants or adult child's needs?
A special and close      relationship with a parent is priceless.
Shouldn't the daughter keep that thought "front and center" and let everyone happily move forward?
If the girlfriend's age bothers the daughter, does she also realize that a younger girlfriend can be a big help to      an aging parent?
AND no doubt she'll take over some of the responsibility that would      otherwise fall to the daughter (who in this case is a far-away living daughter).
If there's a concern about      inheritance issues, assuming the aging parent is of sound mind, there's      nothing legally that can be done.
However...
If a child feels comfortable      having a conversation about prenuptial agreements, and understands monies can be put in a trust for the younger woman's lifetime      with the remainder going back to his family after her death, that's a possible      conversation.
But details should be checked with an attorney to be certain      of facts before such a conversation takes place.
Concern      about a "gold-digger" or less-than-desirable      "girlfriend?"
One can always try Googling or--at the      extreme--hire a private detective.
This could legitimately be considered as "helping an aging parent" when there are seemingly valid reasons for concern.
Although aging parents may do things that we are skeptical of, they are still our parents.
We are still their children.
If they are of sound mind, is it better to let go of efforts to control things that don't endanger life and limb or their finances?
Or should we, in our effort to help our parents age well, direct that energy towards making them happy?
What do you think?
Share your thoughts.
Leave a comment.
(Please use the gmail address at right if comments don't work.)
Also check out http:helpparentsagewell.com.
The homepage is not yet finished, but we're getting there.    
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, July 6, 2010>
I have now learned not to write a post that poses an important  question, on whose answers the next post depends, over a three-day  holiday weekend...not, at least, if the blog posts are written on  Saturdays and Tuesdays.
Readership, I guess, can be expected to be down over such weekends.
Hopefully with additional days off, caring children who live near  parents and upon whom most of the responsibility usually falls, can take  a break from needing to help aging parents or can plan something fun  and different for them.
Even better, for children who live near, would be for at least one  far-away living sibling to come and relieve that sibling upon whom most  of the responsibility falls.
Francine Russo explains  --and this is my "take"--that  it means a lot for a sibling to take the  initiative (obviously without being asked) to plan to visit aging  parents at a time that can free up the other sibling for a few days.
And what could be better than a 3-day holiday weekend!
This not only gives the near-living sibling some time off, but  signals that the far-away living sibling understands and appreciates  what is being done on a regular basis to help their aging parent(s).
Until Saturday when we return to the aging father, his young  girlfriend and devoted daughter---
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, July 3, 2010>
How do we feel when a widowed or divorced aging parent finds a new love?
When we love our parent and we're focused on helping parents age well, what happens emotionally?
Are we happy?
threatened?
suspicious?
Now add these specifics: the father is seventy-something-years-old and his girlfriend is four years older than his devoted daughter.
This is the situation and while not the norm, it's probably not that uncommon.
With the help of senior advisor, Dr.
Bud, MD (psychiatrist), some information and thoughts follow.
We know this daughter's hurting.
But, according to Dr.
Bud,  it's not her problem.
"It's a problem she's  going to have to deal with," he says.
I like that phrasing.
My instinct would have been to say "It  has become her problem."
Dr.
Bud's response suggests there's a solution..doesn't just leave it  as a problem hanging out there.
Injecting a girlfriend into  a family's dynamics no doubt requires getting used to under most  circumstances.
But the adjustment can be tempered by the knowledge that  having a girlfriend, in and of itself, should be a  positive as we think about helping aging parents.
It's an additional  and important connection that adds, we can assume, vitality and interest to an aging  father's life.
Indeed we've discussed in previous posts the fact that relationships  help aging parents to stay engaged.
"Social connectedness" is identified  as one of the three lifestyle factors that are the most significant  predictors for healthy aging,"according to the MacArthur  Study on Successful Aging, (which  studied people age 70-79).
Further proof that relationships help parents age well.
So we ask: would the daughter's feelings be the same if the girlfriend  was a more appropriate age?
This age thing is a problem that's out of  the ordinary scheme of things.
Dr.
Bud calls it "a violation of  expectations."
(I guess it's similar to our belief that children shouldn't die before their parents.)
Other questions we're wondering about: Is she worried she may lose her father?
Is there concern about inheritance?
Is the girlfriend a "gold-digger?"
Does the daughter fear her father will be taken advantage  of?
We will have suggestions in Tuesday's post.
In the meantime you may have had--or know of someone whose had--a similar experience.
Please weigh in with comments (to helpagingparents@gmail.com if the  comments section doesn't work for you).
A devoted daughter, who's hurting, is out there.
*             *           * Resources relating to the three lifestyle factors: social connectedness , UCLA's summary of the MacArthur Foundation report, Successful Aging
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 29, 2010>
Following up....Yes, male aides or caregivers--because of their physical strength,  do help aging parents--men especially--to feel more confident and secure, according to one currently hospitalized grandfather in his 70's.
His take: the nurturing and gentle nature that female nurses provide in a hospital setting is wonderful--"kind of like a mother" and very much appreciated after serious major surgery in his case.
And he never gave a second thought to "privacy" issues when being bathed.On the other hand, this grandfather was quick to mention the very attractive blonde woman--a "Fellow" who was part of the surgeon's team that visited him each day--as well as the attractive and very able physical therapist.This reminded me of my father's emergency quintuple bypass surgery in southern California when he was 76.
The heart surgeon (who a few years later had among his patients a former president of the United States) had put together a highly experienced team of good looking men and very pretty women.
Prior to surgery, patients received a small booklet with photos--explaining each team member's background and hobbies.My unmarried brother's spirits picked up when he met a very beautiful team member and I remember saying to my brother something like: Dr. X's patients aren't going to die--the men are going to want to see the women team members again and the women are going to want to wake up and see the handsome men.No doubt it was the surgeon's skill, but the team had to be an asset.
It not only helped aging parents to feel better about the situation (Mom and Dad), but it gave us all something to talk about which diverted our minds from a serious situation.
And Dad lived to be 94.
*              *                 *Today I also heard from an 86-year-old woman who said she needed to tell me that the lighted pocket magnifying glass is the best for older people.
She has vision problems and uses it daily--many times.
As stated in an earlier Mother's Day Gifts post, it truly helps parents age well and at $9.99 how can you go wrong?As we try to help aging parents, hearing your thoughts and being able to pass them on to others through this blog, helps us reach our goal--to help parent age well.
Thank you.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 26, 2010>
"My  parents were my priority.
I devoted myself to their needs," says a 60-year-old married daughter who had three  teenagers and an important volunteer job at the time.
"For over a decade their  commitments and evening social engagements took precedence over plans my  husband and I had as well as my friends...In retrospect, I gave up a  lot."
This is the extreme, of course.
Her parents remained  connected and engaged, aged well, lived long lives, and she was at their  "beck and call" until the end.
Being engaged and connecting with people is important--we know that .
To that end we've spent untold hours providing opportunities for our children.
Think: hours spent car pooling and driving back and forth to various activities and birthday parties when children needed a driver?
We make these efforts to help children age well.
Should we make the same effort to help parents age well?
Some do.
Most of us don't make such a sacrifice.
The dedicated daughter's parents never had the chance to become couch potatoes.
But what about those who are at risk or have already slipped into that mode?
It's frustrating...  ...
But summer presents additional opportunities to jump-start aging parents, assuming they can walk--unaided or with walker or cane...and go for a ride.
Even a wheel chair works in most instances.
Usually this doesn't entail a huge commitment from adult children and most aging parents want to get out for something they will enjoy.
If they don't, don't be disappointed.
It happens.
Just plant the idea and let it "gel."
Then try again later.
It may make them feel good just knowing that you care enough to try and try again.
To begin: Set aside enough time so this isn't a "rush job."
Time is in such short supply for us, but often hangs heavy on older people plus, they move slower.
If they're going to feel this is an imposition--older people have pride and many won't want to impose--forget it.Plan with them (including them shows respect and gives them something new to think about) or give them options to choose from.
For those who don't get out much (except to go to doctors), "short and sweet" may be best.
You can judge that based on your comfort level and theirs.
It can be as simple as:          <!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->   sitting in a park, having a sandwich and watching the people, dogs etc.
which provide                   easy topics of conversationtaking a drive through town, to places your parent is familiar with, to new buildings and             areas of town (if a parent rarely gets out), to your home (have a snack there)going to a mall, watch the people, go into a shop that interests your parent or has                    inventory that used to interest your parent (sporting goods, technology, hardware store)                and check out what's new, have a snack  a planned-ahead visit to a friend of your parent's, or to see a grandchild, or family member  a drive that includes the grandchild's school, your workplace, another important place in your life or their earlier life (assuming they'd like that).
Obviously during the nice-weather days of summer, opportunities are unlimited.
Time, your parent's strength, the activity, and your tolerance are the keys to success.
And, if successful, planning for the next time gives aging parents something to look forward to.
Senior advisor, R, calls that a "carrot."
And, according to her, "carrots" are extremely important to older people and definitely help parents age well.      
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 22, 2010>
"Honey"  or "Sweetie:" No.
"Boss" or "Chief:"  Yes!
Finding "the   right" caregiver/ aide/companion when a  parent comes home from the   hospital--or at any time-- is a challenge  most adult children face.
But   other things being equal, our first thought for an aging father is    usually not about the aide's gender.
This  prompted my very first post, "Release    from the Hospital."
I explain some men prefer men for obvious  reasons or  because they don't appreciate the nurturing nature (which   often includes  being called "Honey" or "Sweetie").
They want "Boss,"   or "Chief.
""Recently I mentioned this to a friend as we discussed helping aging  fathers.
My friend quipped something like "they'd prefer a male to an  attractive female?"
OK.  All  that sounds sexist.
But to my knowledge I haven't been  proven wrong.
Women are supposed to be more nurturing; I'm guessing  for the most part  they are.
When caring for older men they may get A+  in the nurturing category, yet score well below that in the  empowering  category.
And isn't feeling empowered an  important ingredient in the  getting-well-and-aging-well mix?
While I'm basically clueless about knowing whatever it is that  men  do to generate "can-do" feelings and masculine pride when  they are  together, I want to share a recent experience with a man in his  90's,  but precede this with my father's experience when he was in his 90's.
When my  father came home from the hospital and needed temporary  help, he was  adamant about having a man.
They talked cars, sports,  male-stuff--it was  empowering, interesting; and he loved getting a   shave--even though it was something he could very well do for himself  (male pampering?).
And even when he was feeling weak the aide made certain he  was  dressed well.
Look good, feel better.
Dignity reinforced.
You get the  idea.
So I  "stuck my neck out" recently when a  much older couple, who have a  part-time, competent cleaning woman,  needed more help.
They had  recently downsized in the town where they  lived and the formerly very  gregarious, involved 90+-year-old husband seemed to lose  interest.
Depression was ruled out by his doctor, but he seemed  depressed.
The fact that he was having some physical problems could have  contributed to this sort of "shutting down."
The  competent cleaning woman was like a family member and was  helping the  husband as needed.
Yet when I heard the story, I   strongly  suggested a part-time male companion.
A male has come to help out and  I'm told  it has made a real difference.
Among other things, the male helper  (because of his physical  strength?)
gave the husband confidence  to take regular walks with him;  he also gave the old man a  shave.
And they went together to a driving  range to  hit golf balls.
"Honey" and "Sweetie" are decidedly  different than "Boss" and "Chief."
This awareness may prove  helpful at some point-- for older fathers and  grandfathers--as we try to  help parents age well.
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
SEXIST?   
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 19, 2010>
Getting Together for Father's Day As a far-away-living daughter I never gave much thought to being with Dad on Father's Day.
Didn't mean I didn't want to be with him.
It just was impractical.
In addition-- Mother was alive for all but 4 Father's Days so my parents and brother celebrated the day together, often with relatives on my father's side of the family.
After Mother died, my father spent Father's Day with my brother.
They had a ritual of going out to breakfast together at the Hilton Hotel many Sunday mornings; Father's Day was no exception--except that they also went to an older cousin's for dinner.
She considered my father like a father, not an uncle.
Her father died when she was young and my dad stepped in where he was needed to help his sister and her two daughters (one being this cousin).
It never occurred to me to check whether or not this was convenient for my brother--he never complained; I thought he enjoyed it.
Nevertheless having heard Francine Russo, author of the recently-published They're Your Parents Too!, discuss her book at a gathering two weeks ago, I found myself having questions--questions about how my brother felt about being the child who was there and my being so far away, even though I assumed major responsibility for orchestrating my parents' care with them as they grew old.
So I telephoned today to check out the Father's Day "obligation" and was glad to find my perception was correct.
Fortunately my counseling training kicked in well over a decade before my parents had health issues.
In my head I had loosely carved out a plan of action for when the time came.
Why?
Because aging grand-parent issues, that affected some of my counselees' families and found their way to my office, provided a "heads up."
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Times; 	panose-1:2 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p 	{margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:10.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Times; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Times; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman";} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->    Father's Day and other major holidays signal family togetherness.
Adult brothers and sisters and their families join aging parents to celebrate on these occasions.
Their adult lives may be different from the life of their youth, their competencies may have changed, but on these holidays the family members who come together fulfill most aging parents' wishes.
Remember:  time with family is the gift most older parents say "means the most."  Siblings who get along reasonably well bring parents pleasure, which certainly helps parents age well.
More about siblings in this coming Tuesday's post    
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 15, 2010>
 If neckties are indeed the most popular Father's Day  gift, I guess I need to include them--with a twist.
But I must admit, I wouldn't have done it had I not received an email from Matt at http://www.tiepedia.com/tie-blog/49-crafts/155-tie-cake.
It's a cool site with posts about real ties... plus!
Obviously Matt's in the Father's Day spirit.Check out the photos of 16 cakes, the creative work of Esperanaza above and others.
Below is one I just have to include; one I would have tried to make for my Dad when he was alive--the sweater vest with buttons down the front.
However, my dad was more traditional.....his sweater vests: one entirely gray, one all navy.
And my husband would vouch for the fact I'm not much of a baker.But possibly you are.
So if you are doing the Father's Day barbecue--or any meal that calls for dessert this coming Sunday, I found a site with an assortment of simpler dessert recipes for Father's Day, including an easy cake that sort of resembles Esperanza's creation.
Of course, there's still time to buy a tie.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 12, 2010>
Neckties are the most popular Father's Day gift purchased, according to the US Census Bureau We often think "traditional gifts" when pondering gifts for aging fathers.
What follows is a mix of gift ideas for older fathers who are relatively healthy and independent-- all designed to help parents age well.
Think technology!
Gifts that contribute to social connections definitely help parents age well.
Social connectedness is one of the three most  important factors in successful aging, according to every major study.
Non-tech-savvy elders can use and should love: technology that simplifies email--plus an oldie.
The Presto Printing Mailbox provides one-way computer communication for older people who don't use a computer.
It receives and prints (but doesn't send) emails and photos and can be programmed to receive email at times the recipient chooses.
It must be connected to a telephone jack, but doesn't interfere with phone service.
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->   PawPawMail calls itself "easy email for seniors.
And it is!The fax machine: an oldie but goodie.
Its original purpose was to transmit important documents (still best for sending information to doctors and for reviewing bills parents question, for example).
It also enables children to put something on paper and fax it to parents, who then have a hard copy to read, reread and show to others if it contains something they're proud of (could be a grandchild's artistic effort).
Easy technology for anyone who has ever placed paper in a typewriter and used a telephone.
Not the usual clothing gifts for old fathers: my father had two clothing requests that I think elderly fathers who--if they're like my father and want to be protected from sun outdoors and warm indoors--would like.
A long-sleeve sport shirt.
Why?
His 90+ years in the sun made him (and his arms of course) susceptible to those skin cancers that need to be removed before they turn into harmful skin cancers.
Short-sleeve shirts prevail in stores in June.
But I found long-sleeve ones on sale and also learned to buy ahead in the winter, especially if I happened to be in a warm weather climate (where there was usually a good selection).A sleeveless cardigan (not over the head) sweater vest.
Older people "run" cold, and Dad liked--no loved--to wear his sweater vest with any and every shirt.
It looked great; easy to get off and on and no problem for him (but possibly for some) to button or unbutton.
He wore it at home.
It also looked good under a jacket when he went out.
His problem: he only had one.
I had to really search to find another one, which was his Father's Day request when he was 93.
Wish I'd known how to knit!
Vision Enhancers: (We know aging produces vision changes in many.)
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:"Courier New"; 	panose-1:2 7 3 9 2 2 5 2 4 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Times; 	panose-1:2 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Wingdings; 	panose-1:5 2 1 2 1 8 4 8 7 8; 	mso-font-charset:2; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:0 0 65536 0 -2147483648 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;}  /* List Definitions */ @list l0 	{mso-list-id:1357389306; 	mso-list-template-ids:-2060006406;} @list l0:level1 	{mso-level-number-format:bullet; 	mso-level-text:&#61623;; 	mso-level-tab-stop:.5in; 	mso-level-number-position:left; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-ansi-font-size:10.0pt; 	font-family:Symbol;} @list l1 	{mso-list-id:2044553104; 	mso-list-template-ids:1929158050;} @list l1:level1 	{mso-level-number-format:bullet; 	mso-level-text:&#61623;; 	mso-level-tab-stop:.5in; 	mso-level-number-position:left; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-ansi-font-size:10.0pt; 	font-family:Symbol;} ol 	{margin-bottom:0in;} ul 	{margin-bottom:0in;} -->   The following, from the Mother's Day Post, are equally good gifts for dads: The mini-maglite, small flashlights that give      great light in dark places.
The small-size lighted pocket magnifying-glass takes up little space, is light weight, not pricey, and truly helps parents age      well by providing enlarged, lit-up print--that remains lit without having to keep a finger on any button (unlike the popular thin credit card style).
Handy for reading menus in dark restaurants.
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:"Courier New"; 	panose-1:2 7 3 9 2 2 5 2 4 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Times; 	panose-1:2 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Wingdings; 	panose-1:5 2 1 2 1 8 4 8 7 8; 	mso-font-charset:2; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:0 0 65536 0 -2147483648 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;}  /* List Definitions */ @list l0 	{mso-list-id:1357389306; 	mso-list-template-ids:-2060006406;} @list l0:level1 	{mso-level-number-format:bullet; 	mso-level-text:&#61623;; 	mso-level-tab-stop:.5in; 	mso-level-number-position:left; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-ansi-font-size:10.0pt; 	font-family:Symbol;} @list l1 	{mso-list-id:2044553104; 	mso-list-template-ids:1929158050;} @list l1:level1 	{mso-level-number-format:bullet; 	mso-level-text:&#61623;; 	mso-level-tab-stop:.5in; 	mso-level-number-position:left; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-ansi-font-size:10.0pt; 	font-family:Symbol;} ol 	{margin-bottom:0in;} ul 	{margin-bottom:0in;} -->    Various gifts for the right dad--        <!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:"Courier New"; 	panose-1:2 7 3 9 2 2 5 2 4 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Times; 	panose-1:2 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Wingdings; 	panose-1:5 2 1 2 1 8 4 8 7 8; 	mso-font-charset:2; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:0 0 65536 0 -2147483648 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;}  /* List Definitions */ @list l0 	{mso-list-id:663169334; 	mso-list-template-ids:-704767902;} @list l0:level1 	{mso-level-number-format:bullet; 	mso-level-text:&#61623;; 	mso-level-tab-stop:.5in; 	mso-level-number-position:left; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-ansi-font-size:10.0pt; 	font-family:Symbol;} @list l1 	{mso-list-id:1856842331; 	mso-list-template-ids:1199067076;} @list l1:level1 	{mso-level-number-format:bullet; 	mso-level-text:&#61623;; 	mso-level-tab-stop:.5in; 	mso-level-number-position:left; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-ansi-font-size:10.0pt; 	font-family:Symbol;} ol 	{margin-bottom:0in;} ul 	{margin-bottom:0in;A library cardLarge print books Newspaper subscription (some have large print editions); possibly one from his hometown Magazine subscriptions (older people like getting something in the mail) A membership to the YMCA A paper map of the world for traveling or well-traveled Dads, plus colored pins so they can mark where they've been and where they're going if they still travel.
A good blood pressure gauge may be the gift that helps parents age well and is appreciated by an aging father or      grandfather.
It may even be recommended by doctors in some cases, but obviously depends on the person.Starbucks's new VIA ready brew individual instant coffee packets--regular or decaf.
According to discerning-coffee-drinking friends, the Columbia Medium coffee is excellent (they don't like the other roast).
Available in 3 or 12 packs.
No mess--just add the packet to the water in a mug, microwave for 1 minute,15 seconds.
Because  it's pricey, coffee-loving dads may resist buying it.
Samples may be available.Tickets to a ballgame on Father's Day with a family member--brings us full-circle to the fact that being with family is the best gift for an aging parent.
And for one Yankee's fan father--nothing could top being at the game with his son on Father's Day.           
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 8, 2010>
June 20th Marks the 100th Birthday of Father's Day Its history is interesting which is why I've provided the above link to what I think is the most comprehensive, accurate account.
However another site offers close to a primary source historical account (it's short) provided by the great-granddaughter of William Jackson Smart, the widowed father who inspired the idea for Father's Day.
The commercialization, of course, has come later; but celebrating fathers has deep roots--going back to the original idea in 1909 and the first celebration in Spokane, Washington in 1910.
WHAT DO OLDER FATHERS WANT FOR FATHER'S DAY?
Noncommercial tops the list.
Being able to do something with their child(ren)/their family.
Some say it really doesn't matter "what," it's just good to be together.
(And this doesn't differ from what most mothers want for Mother's Day.)
Easier to do when children live near.
Ideas for being together are only limited by our imagination.
We go to them; they come to us.
We do something special based on their interests (day trip, ballgame, picnic etc); they come over and "it's just good to be together" (and usually includes a meal).
Aging, old and very elderly parents like to reminisce with family who share common memories.
One nephew, whose father has died, invites his 90-something-year-old uncle and wife to his apartment for dinner in June each year.
They talk about old times, the uncle shares his remembrances and loves the evening.
Being able to do whatever they want with their child(ren) on a given day.
In other words, an IOU for a day and doings of their choice.
on the other hand-- To get a nice card, with a nice sentiment, and be left alone (or with only his wife) is the wish of one aging father who see his children daily or almost daily has a need to "carve out time for himself.
"Of course, celebrating Father's Day (as well as Mother's day) is  especially meaningful when far-away-living children can participate; but that's often not possible.
A Father's Day card, with a calendar page enclosed  marking the date with plans to be together at a later time or enclosing  tickets for something to do together at a later time, has both immediate  and long-lasting value.
And sometimes we just hit it right and that big  effort becomes a cherished memory.
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->    "Dad was beginning to have problems.
I think he knew it.
He wanted one more opportunity for a fishing trip...just the two of  us.
And he phoned me here in the East and asked if I could come out West  so we could go fishing together.
It was his last fishing trip.
It was like old times."
CAN OUR GIFT ADD SOMETHING TO AN AGING FATHER'S LIFE?
Technology...related??
While some older fathers are clueless about technology, deep down some may be curious.
And when we think about it, adding new technology to their lives would help them age well--or better.
The simplicity or complexity depends, of course, on an ability to learn--regardless of age.
One grandchild who thought grandpa would like a computer has written simple instructions beginning with turning on/off the computer, and accessing, writing and sending emails.
The instructions are very limited and simple.
Grandpa's new computer--a gift from the family--comes with beginner's lessons from the grandchild, (using the little, hand-made, newly-created, simple instruction booklet).
An adult son has downloaded his elderly father's favorite music to an iPod and showed him how to use it.
His father loves music, but doesn't "do" technology because he's in his nineties.An IOU from a child or grandchild to come over and help with any technological problems (reprogramming the coffee maker, "fixing" the computer etc.)
may be welcomed.
Or we could substitute: "come over and help with repair problems, gardening or other chores.
"Saturday's post will highlight the practical and the "little luxuries"-- things that contribute to help parents--in this case dads and granddads-- age well.         
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, June 5, 2010>
While my blog is becoming a .com, my posts will feature relevant themes from other sources.
Writing about D-Day is a logical successor to Tuesday's post on the Veteran's "Aid and Assistance Pension Program" benefits.
Are all qualified  elders receiving these benefits?
Don't they have the potential to remove some of the stress from care-giving children as well as from qualifying old and elderly parents?
Note: "45,000 Allied troops" are alive today,  is Wikipedia's answer to: "How  many D-Day veterans are alive today?"
Additionally, Wikipedia informs us: According the Department of Veterans  Affairs, an estimated 2,583,000  veterans from WWII were still alive in September 2008 but dying at the  rate of about 900 per day.
This puts the total living population at  just over 2 million in November 2009.
*                 *               *  The 66th Anniversary of D-Day  Joint Chiefs chairman pays tribute to D-Day fallen By ROBERT BURNS (AP) - today  Normandy  ceremonies mark 66th anniversary of D-Day (AP) today   Meet a D-Day veteran in Vermont and in Tennessee  and learn their story as featured in the newspaper.
I think you'll be glad you did!
It was a great generation.
function adsIframeHtml() {       return ['<!DOCTYPE html><html><body style="margin: 0pt; padding: 0pt;"><script type="text/javascript">',           'google_ad_client = "ca-google-hostednews-ap";',                         'google_page_url = "http://www.google.com/hostednews/ap/article/ALeqM5hlK7B89utqDEw5Gn8raOK264iKsgD9G5Q1M00";',                       'google_language = "en";',           'google_ad_section = "article";',           'google_ad_format = "300x250_as";',           'google_ui_version = 1;',           'google_ad_type = "text";',           'google_safe = "high";',           'google_ad_height = "250";',           'google_ad_width = "300";',           'google_color_bg = "FFFFFF";',           'google_color_border = "0066CC";',           'google_color_line = "FFFFFF";',           'google_color_link = "003399";',           'google_color_text = "000000";',           'google_color_url = "008000";',           '<\/script><script src="http://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/show_ads.js"><\/script><\/body><\/html>'].join('\n');     }    _ 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, June 1, 2010>
Memorial Day weekend is behind us.
Yet old and young veterans, their wives and their widows remain.They may be parents or grandparents; may have aged well--or not.
While veteran's benefits are widely discussed, widows of WWII veterans are more likely to have outlived their husbands and the benefits discussed below (which are under-used), may have never entered anyone's mind.When these older and elderly parents still live at home and have serious health issues, adult children know only too well how much is required to help them remain at home.
Family and friends may be giving them the help that they need even when assisted living or a nursing home would be more appropriate, but not doable for various reasons.Possible Help From the Department of Veteran's AffairsThe Department of Veteran's Affair's "Aid and Attendance Pension Program" may help aging parents with certain health issues to remain in their home (and help their adult care-giving children as well).
Or, may help with assisted living or other living situation's expenses.
While my posts focus on relatively healthy, independent-living, aging parents, I'm taking changing the focus a bit here based on a longtime friend's recent experience with her elderly mother.Her elderly mother (a WWII veteran's widow) has lived in an apartment attached to my friend and her husband's home for decades.
An intelligent, interesting, involved and independent widow, these qualities helped her age well until her macular degeneration progressed to the point where she is legally blind in both eyes at age 90+.
She now needs additional help to remain in her apartment.My friend is smart; enlisted the help of a social worker and learned, among other things, about available services.
The "Aid and Attendance Pension Program" is one.
The following are general guidelines for eligibility:*One must be a veteran or surviving spouse of a veteran--the latter married to the veteran at the time of death.
*The veteran must have served 90 days of continuous service--one day being during time of war.
*The person must have medical need, that won't improve, and affects some acts of daily living (ADL) to the point that help is required.
--or--  *the person needs to live in a "protected environment" (could be own home) for his/her own safety (think dementia or stroke)  *the person is legally blind in both eyes.The key is to have the maximum monthly pension offset all of the veteran's monthly income with qualifying medical expenses.
Those "qualifying expenses" can include caregiver expenses for caregivers who come in to help, as well as for adult child/children if they do the care-giving.
(In the latter case children must be paid like a regular employee based on what's reasonable.
)The Next StepDealing with any governmental agency takes time and we know if we are busy trying to keep our parents afloat, we may not be able to stretch the 24-hour-day enough to find that time.
Knowing that there's a law practice with professionals who specialize in veteran's benefits may be useful, so I'm including a link.
I do not endorse nor am I qualified to endorse.
But my smart friend is using it to help get through the paper work.
Communicating directly with the Department of Veteran's Affairs and reading the website is, of course, always a first step that costs nothing but time.UPDATEFor annotated, additional sites and links click Sept. 22, 2010 post. 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 29, 2010>
The celebration of Memorial Day has changed from the holiday our parents experienced when they were young, which was on May 30th.
In those days it was celebrated over a 3-day weekend only when it fell on a Friday or a Monday.
It was a day for some families to visit the cemetery and pay their respects.
For others, my senior advisors recall, it was a major family-get-together day that brings back many fond memories.
"In those days I would be so busy I wouldn't even have time to talk to you on the telephone," said R, age 98 and one of our senior advisors.
"We would have around 35 for a barbecue--children, cousins--I miss it...very much.
Today is a different generation.
We used to live close--a hop, skip, and a jump away.
But now family is more spread out....and a lot of people are lazier.
They don't want to do the extra work; they prefer to be a guest.
"Whether a worker or a guest, enjoy the holiday weekend.
Tuesday I'm hoping to have important information for widows of men who worked hard to make the world a safer, better place--widows of World War II veterans.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 25, 2010>
Discomfort.
Expense.
Strange sounds.
Vanity attack.
...And we wonder why older people resist hearing aids--or put them in a drawer.
Is it because they are too expensive to throw out or because they are reminders of aging and thus too difficult and depressing to have to deal with?
Which-ever.
The bottom line:  people who aren't hearing well-- are missing out.
If our parents  have hearing loss, we know they're at a  disadvantage but did we realize:they may feel self-conscious about asking people to repeat orabout not responding appropriately to what has been said...a joke, for instancethey seem more likely to put up with hearing loss than people who have vision problemsAs we think about M's experiences in last Saturday's post, many of us can no doubt empathize.
"Better Hearing Month"To help aging  parents who may be experiencing hearing  loss or hearing aid  frustration, check out "Hearing     Loss Isn't Just an 'Old' Thing", "Hearing     aids still considered an old people thing" and WebMD.
Also check out the hearing  aid information.
These links  augment previous "Hearing Loss" posts, and provide additional  understandings and information.
And since May is "Better Hearing Month"  there is more information than usual  "out there.
"FYI: I shared this post with several older women and learned all had tried--and discontinued--hearing aids.
"I've had it (the hearing aid) in a drawer in a little change purse...about 4 years," said one.
All said they would be interested in trying again if there was a return policy.
So, adult children--take note.Initially  I planned  to link to "Hearing Well in a Noisy World," Consumer   Reports July 2009, and tried to do that, but couldn't since  I'm away from my own computer as I write this.
You can no doubt search and find the 2009  article as  well as other timely articles because.....it's May!
Reading these articles supports and reconfirms M's experiences and suggestions; and hopefully offers additional ammunition to help our parents age well. 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 22, 2010>
Why Hearing Aids Get Put in a Drawer, Never to Come Out Again "Two years ago I discussed hearing aids with my doctor.
He told me the best place to have an evaluation and said, just like someone needing a hip replacement, I'd know when the time was right.
So I had the evaluation recently--two years later."
M, age 80+ *              *             *  Help Parents Age Well offers something special.
An advisory panel of stellar seniors with "smarts" and good, common sense that have served them well as they do their best to age well.
They live in several parts of the United States, have at least one adult child (many of whom have spouses), and they'll share thoughts with you and participate in answering your questions in the weeks ahead.
All senior advisors are at least 80 years old; possess a good understanding of themselves, and were selected because of their sensitivity to the challenges of aging, their ability to meet those challenges and their ability to express themselves.
A weekly check with my advisors reviews ideas for the weekly posts.
When I first contacted M about hearing loss, she informed me she just got a hearing aid.
She knows first hand; it's all fresh in her mind.
So I introduce her today, and will continue to introduce at least one advisor each month.
KNOWLEDGE COMES, BUT WISDOM LINGERS Inscription over a gate on the campus of Scripps College, Claremont California* * * Meet M. She has been widowed 11 years and had two sons.
One son died unexpectedly after finishing college and becoming engaged--two years before the death of her husband.
She has one married son, who lives less than an hour away.
M was a stay-at-home mom, helped her mother (who died at 108) to age well, and had a responsible office position at a company's headquarters while her boys were in college.
Since her husband died, she has been involved in volunteer work, was president of a club of 300+ women and today handles rentals for the historic building that houses that club.
M's hearing aid experience  Not good!
"Initially the hearing aids were so uncomfortable I pulled them out while driving--after leaving the audiologist's...and managed to drop one of the tiny batteries on the floor.
They aren't that easy to see and find!
I was so discouraged and thought what a waste of thousands of dollars.
I probably would have gone home like so many people do--and put them in a drawer and never looked at them again, except for the fact that they gave me an appointment for two weeks later.
(It was included in the price.)
But I left them in a drawer until two days before the scheduled appointment and decided I'd better try them.
They didn't seem to fit well--felt lose, were uncomfortable, and my ears itched."
Perseverance!
"I might not have persevered if the audiologist hadn't been persistent and encouraging, making an adjustment, and giving me some pointers along with another appointment (again included in the price).
I felt I would have to give an accounting of myself in two weeks so I wore them but still wasn't convinced.
I learned I wasn't putting the batteries in correctly at the next appointment, and then--" Amazing!
"I left the audiologist's after the third appointment to attend a meeting when I realized I was hearing everything!
I didn't have to pretend laughing when people laughed at something I couldn't hear; I didn't have to be embarrassed to ask someone to repeat something.
I was used to piecing a conversation together as well as I could and maybe missed 10-15%.
Now I hear it all."
End Result: "I no longer must turn the TV volume up so loud that I worry about my neighbors complaining.
It took three additional appointments, but I'm used to the hearing aids and I'm no longer aware of what I call 'exaggerated sounds' that I heard in the beginning--things that sounded weird-- like the rustle of tissue paper or water running.
I'm very pleased at this point and I give credit to the encouragement of the audiologist."
THE BIG QUESTION: Why do people resist hearing aids?
"Certainly because they take time to get used to and they must be cleaned and batteries must be put in correctly and replaced when necessary.But also hearing aids--unlike glasses--are a symbol of old age--like a cane.
And many older people's vanity gets in the way.
You know it takes wisdom to start using a cane, and it takes wisdom to know when you should start using a hearing aid."
M reminds adult children:--"Old people can become very stubborn about certain things."
Translated: if you've mentioned a hearing aid to a parent once, continued suggestions probably won't help (unless it's a suggestion from a doctor).
--"If you're asked to repeat something, repeat slowly--not louder."
--"The tone of voice that accompanies talking loud, can be easily mistaken for impatience."
--"Try not to convey impatience to your parents."
PS.
M also mentioned the fact that men may be more resistant to hearing aids because they usually don't have hair, like women, that hides  their ears and thus, their hearing aid.
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->       
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 18, 2010>
HAMPERING COMMUNICATIONAn aging parent's hearing loss can't help but impact--to some degree--his or her quality of living and potential to age well.
And, as many will attest, it can exasperate others' efforts to communicate.
While we most likely make polite allowances for casual acquaintances, it can be especially frustrating when it hampers communication with our parents.CAUSING IMPATIENCE IN ADULT CHILDRENWe're discussing important matters.
We're pressed for time and are asked to repeat.
Curt responses like that of the "wonderful daughter" in Saturday's post aren't unusual.
Aging parents' hearing loss may cause our responses to inadvertently chip away at their self-esteem.
And doesn't this work at cross purposes to our efforts to help parents age well?WHEN TRYING TO EMPOWER STILL-COMPETENT AGING PARENTS TO CONSIDER A HEARING AID: Pull them into the conversation as equal participantsBeware of--and resist--  role reversalRealize that proving we're  right may be less important than reaching the goal of having parents  "buy in" and move forwardRemember that  using "I" statements prevents feelings from coming across as a lecture  or as fact: ("I may not be correct but.../ it may just be my concern  but:...you don't seem to be hearing as well as you used to/ you don't  seem to be using your hearing aidsSAMPLE CONVERSATION "You know, Mom/Dad, lately I've noticed--and maybe you have too..." (this is respectful; pulls them in as an equal participant in the conversation) "that you've been asking me to repeat things a lot lately.
"Parental response: "I don't know what you're talking about.
""You don't know what I'm talking about..." (we repeat back and we confirm respect with an accurate account) "well yesterday you asked me to repeat several times what I said about Sally's new home.
"Parent: "well there was that truck going by and making a lot of noise.
""True, but I repeated about Sally's new home twice after that.
You know it could be a hearing problem.
Do you think it makes sense to check it out with Dr.
Smith?"
(respectful, validates parental participation.
And chances are, unless parents are in denial, they realize there is a hearing problem and most should act to get help).Of course when something threatens life and limb, we know we must deal with it immediately.
Hearing loss, while not as dramatic as dangerous driving, can be a threat.
An inability to hear properly, for example, can result in a failure to heed warnings and could preclude  anticipation of a dangerous situation.
( A previous post about falling mentions the affects of inner ear problems on balance.
)THE AUDIOLOGIST'S IMPORTANCEThe preceding makes a good case for older people with hearing loss to schedule a hearing evaluation.
I understand from my senior advisors that finding an experienced audiologist who can instill confidence in an older person is important.
As opposed to going to an ophthalmologist  or optometrist who writes a prescription for eyeglasses (which usually give noticeable vision improvement very quickly), most often hearing aids don't solve hearing loss problems as easily or quickly.A RETURN POLICY?Is this the reason there's usually a 30-day return policy on hearing aids?
Many older people (including ones I spoke with) missed or were unaware of the return policy and just gave up on their hearing aid.
Children committed to helping older parents age well may be surprised to find that at one time in the past their parents tried and gave up on still-in-the-drawer--hearing aids.One of my senior blog advisors, wearing a brand new hearing aid, will be introduced in this coming Saturday's post.
She shares her experience--and possibly that of some contemporaries--to help older parents (in this case) with hearing loss--age well.
*                  *                     *For excellent professional hearing loss information: check out NIH and Mayo Clinic.
For recent questions/answers about situations with parents' hearing loss, browse the Caregiver Questions in Agingcare.com's comments.
Carol Bursak, the site's "Community Moderator," has been writing for a long time--offers solid information and good advice.
You can also check out Carol's site.Posting comments below is still "ify."
Contacting me at the gmail address to the right is best.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 15, 2010>
"What did you say?"
"I just told you......."   Does this snip-it of conversation with an aging parent sound familiar?
And if it does, is there anything wrong with it?We know that hearing loss may be a normal part of aging; but not all older people suffer (and I do mean suffer) from it.
Mother could hear a pin drop right up until she died less than two weeks short of her 89th birthday.
My dad, on the other hand, wore his hearing aid when he felt like it.
Yet as both were--I guess you could say literally on their deathbeds (that sounds rather awful, doesn't it)--I was told "hearing is the last to go."
Thus, we were all careful about what was said in their presence.Currently my 18+ year-old cat, who sees probably  better than I, has almost total hearing loss.
It seemed to come about quite suddenly.
I wonder how it mirrors the human experience.
She, a stray, no longer hears nor comes running when called; she loved being outdoors but not any longer unless someone is out there with her; and she's often scared when we apparently sneak up on her.
So we have great patience with her; perhaps because she never asks "What did you say?"
and we never need to repeat.As we try to help parents age well, we try not to diminish or demean by saying something--or saying something in a way--that makes them feel bad.
Obviously!
And yet--An 80-year old mother pointed out that her perfectly wonderful daughter had a habit of responding to the ubiquitious "What did you say?"
with a bit of impatience in her voice (which made her mother feel bad) as she repeated whatever it was she initially said.
So, for starters, when repetition is requested it may make sense to think carefully about how we respond.
Who knows--that old saying "it's not what you say, it's how you say it" might possibly be applicable.Tuesday's post will make use of my counselor training with suggestions for responding to an aging parent who isn't hearing well or isn't using an already-purchased hearing aid; followed by tips for helping parents age well by doing what's necessary to confront and combat hearing loss.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 11, 2010>
THIS POST HAS BEEN RECOPIED, REWRITTEN, THEN IMPORTED TO MY NEW SITE ON WORDPRESS AND TO THE JUNE 22nd POST HERE ON BLOGSPOT.
CHECK IT OUT!
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 8, 2010>
Random thoughts:  I was feeling a bit dismal this morning.
The response to my last post was---my interpretation--not that enthusiastic.
I guess a goat, given in mom's honor as a Mother's Day gift, isn't as popular as I thought it would be...But I was heartened by one email reinforcing the value and popularity of supporting Heifer International's work throughout the world.
I also like the idea that there's a colorful gift card that's downloadable after making a donation.
Thus, a last-minute donation to honor someone, doesn't necessitate scrambling for an appropriate card.
But I don't know how many clicked on the link to learn that.Next I went grocery shopping.
Trader Joe's featured a "bouquet in a box" --roses, lillies, gerber daisies, small pom pom mums, and two stems of  daisy-type flowers in a complimentary-color, plaid, box-shaped, waterproof bag for $12.99.
Really pretty!
You felt good just looking at it.
Bought one; took it  home with the groceries; then inspected it and took it apart to get leaves out of the water as they disintegrate and make the water bad.
So I cut off leaves, recut stems, put in fresh water, then decided to take it to 99-year-old Edie, who's fragile, but "with it.
"She's the "Edie" featured in my book and her words of wisdom are in past posts.
I heard she had fallen a while back.
Went to her daughter's home to find out I'd missed her by 15 minutes.
She was on her way to the airport with her other daughter, who lives in the south.
And she will be living with that daughter from now on.I have her phone number, I will phone tomorrow.
I will--no doubt--never see her again.
Am I feeling a bit dismal?
No.
I have a very pretty bouquet in a box that I will enjoy on Mother's Day and beyond.
And I will speak with Edie tomorrow and wish her a happy Mother's Day.
And I will ask if she'd like a goat--or a share of a goat--donated in her honor to help raise a family out of poverty.
I think she will.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, May 4, 2010>
 Sunday is Mother's Day as we know--a day we do more than just help aging parents.
We celebrate mothers--old and young...and grandmothers and great-grandmothers and mothers-in-law.
I began thinking: What about important women in our  lives who have no children to honor them?
And what about the less organized among us  who still need a last-minute gift that shows special thought and caring?
I was with a woman last week, a senior citizen who has no children or living parents although she has two nieces she thinks the world of.
I asked if she and her husband had plans for this coming Sunday.
Her reply: she hoped she would hear from her nieces.
They had phoned on past Mother's Days.
They lived in another state and she loved when they called--but of course, she couldn't be certain they would phone.
That conversation generated a few ideas.
First, Mother's Day is our opportunity to let women--our mothers and others--know that they mean a lot to us.
A phone call, mailed cards, flowers, candy--all can convey the message.
And for older people, the importance of being remembered by someone other than children may be greater than we think.
Three women--age range late eighties to 102--all with children and grandchildren, report for years they have received a Mother's Day card from one of their children's friends.
That, they said, was extra special.
Second, two very different, last-minute gift ideas for mothers.
Nether is "stuff."
The first, in honor of your mother, make a contribution to a recognized charitable/nonprofit organization 501(c) (3)  that is meaningful to her.
The second is in the "help parents age well" category, connected with driving/transportation, exercise and stimulation.
One rather unusual, but worthy charity idea that may be "right' for certain mothers is a donation to Heifer  International, A Heifer International email said in  part: Mothers go by many names:  Mom, Momma, Ma, Mati, Nay, Mzaa...  We have a few others:  Hen, Ewe, Cow, Sow, Doe.
This Mother's  Day celebrate your mother by giving one--a mother that will  provide a  new means of income and nutrition to a hungry family.
The  mothers of  the world will thank you...Whatever gift  you give through Heifer  will be passed on, with proper training and  tools, from one mother to  another.
Entire communities will be changed  in your mom's honor.
I checked out the nonprofit organization with Dr. Viola Vaughn, Teachers College Distinguished Alumni from Senegal, who knew about its worthwhile work.
Since I was thinking of donating a goat, we discussed goats and she explained how much they contributed to a family's being able to sustain itself.
Clicking the Heifer link informs us that as little as $10 gives a share of a goat, (an entire goat is $120; $20 buys a flock of chickens etc.).
The second idea involves transportation, exercise, and stimulation, which take on more and more importance as parents age.
Gifts that incorporate these aspects of living into an aging mother's life can be a real plus, if they don't already exist.
First, check to see if/when a CarFit evaluation (sponsored by AARP and AAA) is available in your community then give your mother an IOU to accompany her to one.
See additional safe-driving suggestions in my October post.
Last month I was in a parking lot where a CarFit evaluation was going on; asked if they could take me without an appointment.
They did.
They check how well one fits into his/her car for safe driving and make suggestions: ie.
seat cushions to elevate drivers who may have age-related "shrinking" that limits visibility, wider rear-view mirrors etc.
Taxi script may be a welcome gift if mothers no longer drive or are hesitant about about driving.
Or consider a gift membership to organizations like the "Y" which usually offer stimulating programs as well as exercise; or a gift certificate for an exercise program like Silver Sneakers that accepts medicare in many states (check it out) and helps older mothers stay fit and engaged.Whatever we do to help aging parents on this day, mothers usually appreciate our efforts and--to reiterate from previous posts-- spending Mother's Day with children and grandchildren is the best.
PS  It would be great--and helpful-- if you could share your thoughts on the gift ideas in these posts with me at the gmail address to the right.
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} a:link, span.MsoHyperlink 	{color:blue; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} a:visited, span.MsoHyperlinkFollowed 	{mso-style-noshow:yes; 	color:purple; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->           
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, May 1, 2010>
I stopped by the Container Store to purchase lighted pocket magnifying glasses as Mother's Day gifts for older friends.
(See last post.)
Later that day, looking at my schedule for the following week, I was reminded that D's birthday was Wednesday.....A  chance to check out reactions to this gift idea that I think can add quality to life--and thus our efforts to help parents and older friends age well.We went to lunch and D opened the small package before the menus came.
I knew she had vision problems; what I didn't know was that it was her 88th birthday.
She phoned me later to say "thank you" and followed the phone call with a written note the next day.
It provides some insights and says in part:"Good friends become more and more important as years go on--I didn't think I needed anything--but you found the perfect present.
"D used the magnifier to read the main menu and dessert menu.
A waiter  came to take dessert orders and I asked if he needed a Mother's Day gift idea for a mother or grandmother.
He told us his mother was in her 80's, had vision issues, he knew that a Container Store was located near his home, and he was going there after work.
Another waiter joined the conversation.
Same reaction.A few days later another Mother's Day gift suggestion came from a friend: A traditional picture frame with a picture of the entire family/families--all the children (and spouses if any) and grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
It's nice to have the whole family inside one frame, it seems.
This caused me to ask about the new frames enabled by technology.
One former stock broker in her mid-late 60's said her children gave her one that "has never been out of the box."
A capable computer-user, she just didn't want to be bothered downloading.Which brings up the point that at a certain age, many people just don't want to be bothered with gifts involving unfamiliar technology.....even when they've used a computer at work for the better part of their life.
So it would make sense to check it out with parents beforehand.
If they're comfortable, go for It.
If not, hopefully ideas from the last three posts are helpful.As we try to help parents age well, check out the lighted pocket magnifying glass and-- if there's still time get every family member together-- you could arrange to have a family photo taken to put in a nice traditional frame.
**********I'm interested to know which gift ideas you like best.
Please comment below or use the gmail address at the right.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 27, 2010>
         <!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} a:link, span.MsoHyperlink 	{color:blue; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} a:visited, span.MsoHyperlinkFollowed 	{mso-style-noshow:yes; 	color:purple; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->   Gifts That Mothers (aging or not) And Grandmothers) Should LoveAging parents (in spite of the fact that they don't want to accumulate more things) love gifts, as mentioned in the last post; and appreciate things that can--in most cases--be "used up."
Mothers who still drive or have convenient access to transportation, can more easily purchase what they need, if money isn't an issue; and younger mothers may not be so concerned with gifts that can be "used up."
For example, one younger mother (in her 60's) likes having all  her children chip in for one gift certificate.
Then she goes shopping and buys "something special"  that she normally wouldn't buy for herself.
We might think older aging parents for whom money and transportation aren't issues should feel the same.
But for many aging mothers who live alone, insecurity--necessary or unnecessary--about spending money becomes an issue at a certain point.
The Mother's Day gift ideas below can be enriching, attractive and/or useful contributions in our effort to help parents age well.
A few may be better afforded if siblings chip in.
---Adding pleasure to a mother's life.
Some children have taken over--as a gift--the bill-paying for something their mother wouldn't want to afford, but they know would add pleasure.
Example: paying for something like Direct TV or HBO--you get the idea.
Grooming and beauty services (hair,  manicure, pedicure, facial, massage) help a mother to feel special.
Make arrangements to be billed--or give a gift  certificate.
(Since old skin can be very delicate, be certain to check that the  preceding are OK for an older mother's situation.)
When thinking about gifting flowers or plants for mothers with a terrace, patio, or small yard, contact a landscape  nursery to check the cost of having flowers  planted (perhaps in a large  container or several smaller containers) if you  are a far-away-living child or can't plant them yourself.
Otherwise, select the healthiest plants you can find at the grocery store (most sell plants and flowers) or nursery.
Check if they go indoors or outdoors.
Flowering plants are living, they change, and  brighten up an outdoor space or an indoor space near a sunny window.
(Sun is necessary for most plants to flower.)
Geraniums can be a good  option: easy care, many colors, indoors or outdoors.
---Things:  usable/needed gifts Older people often feel cold (even when  we feel warm); stories about children of aging parents sneaking to  turn down the thermostat when they're in their parents' home are common.
A good-looking sweater or jacket (that may or may not pull things together and make an  outfit) may be a good idea, as is an attractive shawl or an  easy-to-get-into comfy robe.
(These can be light weight for what we  consider the warm months, and definitely a heavier weight for colder  months.)
A new nightgown, pajamas, or slippers may be a needed and welcome  gift.
One adviser (who's careful about falls and balance)  says that Dear Foams makes a very soft, easy to put on, slipper that feels "wonderful" and isn't heavy.
Knowing and gifting a favorite lipstick/cream/lotion is  always appreciated, especially when it saves a non-driving mother from  having to go out and buy them.
(Note: I'm told perfume isn't as popular with older people today because of allergies--check it out.)
An adviser reminds me that attractive postage stamps (a "LOVE" one was recently issued with beautiful flowers) are appreciated by mothers who lack transportation to a post office... so practical for older people who still write notes and pay bills by mail.
We  know aging produces normal vision changes in many.
The usefulness of  night-lights is highlighted in the Falling  and Fall Prevention posts.
Also check the mini-maglite, small  flashlights that give great light in dark places.
And the small size lighted pocket magnifying-glass gets rave reviews.
Everyone seems to love it.
It takes up little space, is light weight,  inexpensive, and truly helps parents age well by providing enlarged,  lit-up print--very helpful for older eyes.
At $9.99 it makes a great, useful Mother's Day gift for your mother--and any older woman you wish to remember.
Lastly, the tried and true, flowers and candy... or what about a box of pretty cookies from the bakery?
When our goal is to  help our parents age well, don't special occasions like Mother's Day give us a  unique opportunity to contribute something pleasurable and useful to  their lives!  
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 24, 2010>
 Gifts That Mothers Will Welcome and Enjoy "For the most part, we really  don't need more things," said most of the older mothers I've spoken with.Their space is limited  in many  cases, so unless gifts can be eaten or used up, or unless  there is  something specific that they need, they really don't want  "things."
OK,  what would they like?---Being  with family.
Being with all of her  offspring is "the best Mother's Day gift a mother could have," says 88-year-old R-2, one of my   advisers.
This thought is echoed by so many.
R-2 further explains: "What I'd like most, if it can be  worked out,  is to have a big dinner at my apartment with my  children,  grandchildren, and great-grandchildren--all enjoying each  other.
My  children are good cooks and they bring the food.
We've done  it  before--but not all the time.
But if they plan it early, it could  work  out.
If it should work out, it would be a beautiful day.
"A  variation on this theme is expressed by another aging mother.
"What I'd really love doesn't need to be on Mother's Day, because my  children--you know they're all in their 40's, working, and all spread  out (geographically)--they'd have to plan to be together.
But I'd  love it if they could plan a get-together--all of them with their  children (my grandchildren)--somewhere, some time in the summer when  the kids aren't in school...and I want everyone to get along, which  means the kids behave well....
They could describe the plans on my  Mother's Day card, letting me know that's my gift.
It would be  something I could look forward to."
---A  child's time, is another treasured gift.
There is more than one way to gift time:First,  as "alone time."
Mothers say they like having alone time with their child (or each  child) apart from spouses.
This has nothing to do with spouses in most  cases; it's simply precious alone time between mother and child.Second, as dedicated time (see 3/23/10 post) carved out once every week or two--to help with errands,  small fix-it jobs, possibly cleaning (for example the inside of her car)  or taking down/putting up storm windows.
The gift could be described in the Mother's Day card, in the form of an IOU.
For  example, IOU 2 hours every other Thursday night to help with errands or  small fix-it jobs.
(An specially smart offer if it keeps aging parents  off ladders.
)"Pledge me hours," is the Mother's Day gift  Viola Vaughn wants.
An individual whose personal gifts seem to come from giving to others--Dr. Vaughn, Founder  and Executive Director of the Women's Health Education and Prevention  Strategies Alliance and 10,000 girls in Kaolack, Senegal, West Africa, was honored today as a Distinguished Alumni  by Teachers College, Columbia University.
(She founded WHEPSA in 2001 to develop new strategies for offering health  and educational service to girls in rural Senegal.)
An American  grandmother, who emigrated to Senegal in 2000, she values the volunteer hours pledged and given to her projects.
For example her niece, a teacher in the US, is taking next year off to honor her aunt's wishes and teach in Senegal.
The gift of time, can be given in a variety of ways--always welcome.---Gifts  that give mothers something to look forward to: for example  tickets to something  in the future....entertainment, a trip.
While  tickets usually cost money, spring flower shows are usually free of  charge in many towns and cities and offer an inexpensive option for  mothers who like flowers.
Finally as  mentioned above, planned-ahead family get-togethers are something to look forward to as well as being at the top of many mother's  Mother's Day wish lists.---Something a parent has asked for--Sometimes an aging  parent asks for something, only to have it forgotten or put off.
For  example, a mother who recovered from a broken hip  noted that for  several years she had asked her son-in-law to put a  railing up on the  porch of the home he and her daughter live in.
And she has asked again  this year.
This  intelligent, independent mother is in her late 80's and  doesn't want to take chances  with falling---again.
"He could let me  know that he's putting up the  railing as my Mother's Day gift with just  a little note on my Mother's  Day card," she said.
"In fact, if they  don't put up the railing, I don't think I'm going there for Mother's  Day."
I guess there's a moral here--if an older parents asks for something.............As we try to help parents age well, the variety of gifts that parents welcome takes many forms.
*              *                *This coming Tuesday's post will conclude with gifts that are better classified as "things."
They are things that can help parents age well.
Most take up very little space.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 20, 2010>
.....Dilemma or Delight?May 9th is Mother's Day this year, so timely suggestions as we try to help parents age well make sense.
Yet thinking about how to celebrate the day with older mothers can prove challenging; or perhaps not.Proximity of mothers and mothers-in-law is a factor.When both live within driving distance--One of my senior advisers, M,  says she lives more than an hour away from her son's wife's mother.
"Standing on their heads like a contortionist to be with both of us on Mother's Day doesn't make sense," she says.
She suggests alternating years when adult children in this situation take their mothers out on Mother's Day.
"A nice card and plans for another time we can be  together (even the Saturday before) is fine."
But in her case, she says, "they shouldn't worry about it.
"D remembers well that she didn't have the dilemma, but her brother did.
Both his mother and his wife's mother wanted their adult children with them on Mother's Day.
While the mothers were within driving distance--they lacked a cozy relationship...didn't want to be together.
So D's brother and wife had to make two long drives together in order to see both mothers.There really was no other choice, I'm told.
Needless to say, D's brother and his wife were weary by the time they saw his mother.
Never-the-less, each mother got her wish.
Children often sacrifice for the sake of a parent!Then, of course, mothers often have more than one child.
So if each child celebrates on a different day, the mother gets double rewards.
In fact, D suggests Saturday can be preferable because places aren't as crowded and staff can pay more attention to making the outing special.Adult children with siblings who live near mothers can work out plans that benefit everyone if people are flexible.
Indeed, D even suggests--perhaps in jest--"Mother's Weekend" instead of "Mother's Day."
And thinking about today's blended and extended families, there may be some wisdom in this idea.My husband and I are far-away living children, so the preceding never affected us.
I have a sibling (who lived near my parents); my husband has none.
Up until last year R, my mother-in law (now 96), flew East to spend Mother's Day with us.
It coincided, more or less, with the Spring Flower Show at our local Woman's Club, which has a membership tending towards "older" women--primarily 55+, with a fair number in their 80's and 90's, so R and some of the women enjoyed a commonality.We sent R a ticket, she stayed with us, and the flower show was a highlight--along with our being together for a week.
We had a solution for the proximity problem and gift dilemma--which lasted over three decades.Mother's Day gifts are the subject of this coming Saturday's post.Reminder:  to contact me use the gmail address at the right, not the "Comments" box below.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, April 16, 2010>
We change the focus a bit today--old grandparents, instead of aging parents.
But the situation is, I think, generic and applicable to either generation as we try to help them to age well.I was with a former colleague this week.
We began with the usual "how are you" to which he replied: "I'm really tired.
I had such a hard night last night--couldn't sleep.
My grandmother's in the hospital."
(My first thought was that she was dying...but no.
In all probability she was going home the next day.
)Our conversation continued.
I learned he and his mother had visited his 92-year-old grandmother the night before.
She asked for a glass of water with ice, which his mother left the room to get.
When she returned, she gave the glass to her mother who complained there was too much ice and too much water.Wanting to be helpful, her grandson (my former colleague), tossed some of the ice in the waste basket and took some gulps of water to reduce the water level, whereupon his grandmother criticized him saying something like "I don't want a glass you've put your lips to.
"My former colleague said he was puzzled, hurt (to say the least).
Then elaborated:  "I'm her favorite grandchild, I'm the oldest.
Since I was four years old we've always done things together, always been in touch.
I said to her 'Look we're the same family--what kind of germs do you think you're going to get from me?
'"A bit of a defensive remark to be sure; but probably the way most of us would respond to an unappreciative, critical comment from a cared-about aging parent, grandparent, relative or older friend.
And we most likely don't feel good about it afterward.But we can understand--and have sympathy for--the 92-year-old grandmother's response.
Let's get picky and examine the circumstances since these kinds of situations happen often--only the specifics will differ.When we're accustomed to feeling we have control (and this is a feeling--and a reality--that keeps aging parents and others engaged in life), don't we fight to keep it?
Being in a hospital, at least for me at a much younger age, greatly reduced feelings of having control.
In fact depending on the circumstance we may feel helpless, definitely frustrated, and these feelings are probably intensified for an older person for reasons I think we can all understand.Thus, to gain some feeling of control (in this case over the way she wants her water), the grandmother sets standards and asserts herself, at the expense of her grandson.
Although it came across that way, it wasn't really criticism of her grandson.
It was the expression of a greater need she had for control.On a similar note I remember when my 93-year-old father gave up driving and was riding with me.
On routes that we had taken a million times together, he would tell me--timing it perfectly--"turn right" or "turn left."
He no longer drove, was no longer in control, but the need to have some control getting us to our destination was still there.We are sensitive adult children or we wouldn't be doing what we're doing and caring the way we care.
And our emotions will take bruising--if not battering--at times.
(Note: I remember a list of things counselors should NOT do that my professor stressed many years ago.
It included taking things personally, whereupon he said basically "If it's a family member forget it.
Your immediate reaction will be emotional.")
My former colleague's reaction--so normal.Understanding the motivation of aging  parents, grandparents and others when we feel criticized, lectured to,  unnecessarily "helped" and unappreciated is important--not only to help parents age well,  but to help ourselves.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 13, 2010>
"I tell my older patients they  should have a night light in their bedroom," emphasized a highly esteemed practicing physician, on the faculty of a major teaching hospital.
I had asked about his experience with older people falling, which he said increased as his long-time patients aged.
And he made a case for night lights as he recounted this story about an 89-year-old man in excellent health, mentally sharp, and still working part time, who had recently experienced an avoidable, bad fall.
"Even though they know their surroundings and can find their way in the dark, a night light would have prevented this," he said.
Like many, the elderly man read in bed at night.
On this particular night he was reading work from his briefcase which, after finishing, he place on the floor next to his bed.
He got up during the night in his unlit room, stepped--then tripped and fell--on the briefcase and papers, and sustained serious bruises, but fortunately no broken bones.
Call a night light an "environmental modification;" call it a "common sense" addition; call it a "using common sense"--like changing from unstable high heels to flattering low heels or flats.
There are many "environmental modifications" that can ensure--to the best of our ability-- that aging parents' homes won't invite falls.
Most of us know that scatter rugs are an accident waiting to happen and that grab bars in showers and tubs and near toilets provide stability.
It's also helpful to know about AARP's  free booklet "Taking Steps to Prevent Falling Head Over Heels" (see  Saturday's post), which provides a short, excellent, informative guide to simple adaptations that we  can help our parents make.
And while it doesn't mention the pitfalls of reading in bed and placing the reading material on the floor to trip on (my helpful hit #2), it mentions the value of night lights and good lighting more than a few times.
So check out AARP's website and search "fall prevention" and "steps to prevent falling" in some of the bulletins and pamphlets (first result).
("Better Balance Prevents Falls" is an example).
Also search "inner ear and balance"  for more specifics on this past Saturday's post.
Additional helpful information can be found in the book, "Fall Prevention," by  Gail Davies and Fran Scully (Infinity Publishing, 2006) and at: stopfalls.org.
Stopfalls.org provides a "basics"  fact sheet for downloading.
It reminds us that a person is more likely  to fall if he or she is 80 or older or has fallen in the past;  The above reinforces the importance of letting aging parents know we won't dump them in assisted living if they tell us they have fallen.
Obviously we're trying to help parents age well, so it's important to gain an understanding of why they fell and possibly involve their physician-- (which shifts the responsibility from us and we avoid seeming like were meddling).
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->             
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 10, 2010>
Older people and the increased likelihood of their falling has been a major concern--no doubt for decades.
The drug industry has come forth with medications to improve bone density.
More recently gyms and senior centers offer programs aimed at improving balance, flexibility, muscle strength, and bone strength, among other things.
And in the last 10 years or so--probably because people are living longer and the likelihood of falling increases the older one gets--the subject of older people falling has spawned considerable literature with ideas for prevention.
To say that older women suffer more fractures than older men probably comes as no surprise.
But the statistics may surprise.
After age 50--and increasing with age as just indicated-- up to one out of four women and one out of fifteen men can anticipate breaking a bone.
Is this because: a) women outlive men; b) their bones are less strong; c) all of the preceding?
No matter.
If we have aging mothers we must be proactive (if they aren't) in our quest to help them age well.
And let's not slight aging fathers.
Bone density is also a problem for some men, so it may bear checking out in older men with slight frames.
It seems obvious that there is proactive prevention--to ward off problems before they become problems ; and reactive prevention--to deal with immediate problems.
Of course, the proactive is easier.
The reactive is difficult to begin with, but is made more difficult because many parents don't tell when they fall (see October post).
Starting with the proactive: When aging parents aren't already taking measures to ensure--to the extent possible--that they will not fall, what can be done that is effective, respectful, and supports self-esteem and competence.
Note: I didn't write "confidence."
Parents may think they have will never sustain a fall, or may be in denial, because they consider themselves healthy (they are) and "in charge."
It's best to begin this conversation before it's needed.
Don't put it off if you think your parent is presently at risk of falling.
If a friend should fall, this news usually travels quickly among older people and is sobering.
It also provides a natural opening to suggest certain check-ups and provide some information--"some" information because we don't want to sound like "know-it-alls" (even when we think we do) or cause overload.
The following are often associated with risk of falling, so check-ups to rule them out or identify them before they become problems makes sense.
Vision--Natural aging may cause problems distinguishing shades of dark colors that could result in missing a step at, for example, a curb or on uneven pavement on cloudy days or at night.
(A small flashlight is a good gift.)
Cataracts at a certain point may make night driving NOT advisable, but shouldn't affect daytime driving, until they worsen.
And outdated prescription-glasses pose obvious risks.Hearing--if balance seems to be a problem, rule out inner ear problems.Balance, dizziness, falling asleep at the wheel (yes, it happens).
Check with pharmacist to rule out medication reactions and/or contact doctor.
An exam may be in order.
Proactive prevention:Bones weaken, which makes falls more dangerous, thus becoming familiar with bone density medication, vitamins, and certain kinds of exercise (ie.
walking, dancing, tai chi) to strengthen bones makes sense.Muscles weaken, flexibility lessens, and reflexes can slow down.
While this occurs naturally to some degree with aging, these changes become more pronounced for inactive people because of the "If you don't use it, you lose it" truism.
An awareness of the above has led to fall-prevention offerings at senior centers and gyms.
Example: tai chi, a gentle but proven effective exercise for balance.
No doubt this is why these classes are popular and offered at senior centers, as are yoga and chair yoga (the latter for the less physically able).
Check out "Silver Sneakers" (www.silversneakers.com), a nationally-offered exercise program designed for seniors, given at fitness centers, and covered by insurance companies (which vary by state).
Lastly, one of my two fall-prevention tips (tip 2 next post).
An octogenarian tells me, that--at least with women-- vanity enters into the falls and fractures discussion.
How?
By the shoes women wear, that can make good balance very "ify" and perhaps even more worrisome if it's your aging mother who is teetering in them.
This fall prevention "head's up" will probably be met with resistance.
Indeed, this kind of discussion may be better coming from a physician.
I'm not ready to give up my shoes yet and perhaps will never think I should.
What about you?
"Fall Prevention" continues on Tuesday.
In the meantime, you might want to order a free copy of "Taking Steps to Prevent Falling Head Over Heels" using AARP's "Home and Community Booklets Online Order Form."
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, April 6, 2010>
Older people fall a lot.
A researcher on a 2008 Oregon Research Institute study to prevent falls among older adults says "falls are a leading cause of mortality and morbidity among adults age 65 and older.
"*Over the weekend I learned via email that two pioneer teachers from the early days of our high school, now in their 90's or nearly 90, had suffered broken hips.
Mailing/email addresses, and telephone numbers were included so we could contact them.
The email also suggested contacting Mr. W. (see my jump   start post), who I visited while on vacation last month, and who the email said had fallen several times but suffered no injury.
I share, in part, my email to the classmate:I did see Mr. W and his wife.
Hadn't planned to stay more than 15 minutes, but ended up staying 2 hours.
It was a good stay--talked about old times, some of our class members, I provided a bit of sworn-not-to-tell gossip and left with the satisfaction of seeing two 87-year-olds who have been through a lot together and are wonderfully grounded emotionally...each in his or her own way.
I guess there have been more letters, cards, etc.
than they can count.
And with that, I think, comes reaffirmation of a life well lived, a life of purpose and contributions..... On that visit I too learned that they fell "a lot."
Their home is well carpeted and "nothing broke."
I remember a friend of my mother's in her 90's telling me a similar story.
This aging--no old, but young at heart--parent fell a lot on carpeted floors and "nothing broke."
She admitted she should use a cane but kept losing it in her home--"and I keep 3 canes and can never find a one," she giggled.It drove her adult children "crazy," but they were firm in their conviction of empowering aging parents and not undermining confidence.
They also knew that continued discussion on the subject of falling accomplished nothing.
But they succeeded in having her wear a pendant with a button she could push for help if she fell.
They decided this was better than destroying what was a wonderful relationship.
And because she was a rational, old parent she knew the pendant was a good idea.
In fact she pushed that button quite often and let the paramedics know which door was never locked so they could easily come and pick her up!
(This also drove her adult children "crazy" but no harm ever came.)
It's probably safe to say that every person over the age of 70 knows of an aging person who has fallen and, unlike a child's fall, has sustained more than just a skinned knee.
Since bones thin with aging, they are weaker and can break more easily.
And healing is slower in older people.
Since fear of falling and breaking a bone is very high up on the list of older people's worries, shouldn't this also concern adult children?I realize that adding the specific information and at least one creative idea aimed at helping aging parents reduce the risk of falls and fractures will necessitate this post being too long.
Thus, Saturday's post will focus on some specifics that I believe are good to know--for both adult children and their aging parents.
*Li, F., Harmer, P.,  Glasgow, R., Mack, K.A., Sleet, D., Fisher, K. J., Kohn, M.A., Millet,  L.M., Mead, J., Xu, J., Lin, M.L., Yang, T., Sutton, B., & Tompkins,  Y.
(2008).
Translation of an effective Tai Chi intervention into a  community-based falls prevention program.
American Journal of Public  Health, 98(7), 1195-1198.Please note: if you have comments click on the gmail address in the right sidebar.
I continue to hear from people who are frustrated because they have spent time writing substantive comments that can't--for some reason--be posted in the comments box.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, April 3, 2010>
...to Keep Older Parents Engaged and Help Them Age WellThis is a time when we celebrate miracles.
The emancipation of the Israelites from slavery in ancient Egypt, when the Red Sea parted.
The Resurrection of Christ  after the Crucifixion.
Older generations fondly recall Seders, when family members gathered together and children looked for the hidden matzo; or Easter services, and the children's Easter egg hunt, and the family brunch or dinner.As with all major holidays there is joy for so many; but for those who are old and feel isolated and lonely there are no miracles.Since Easter is here, not surprisingly my senior advisers tell me that Easter can be very lonely for older people living alone, without children to visit or take them out.
On the other hand, suggestions for doing things that will bring pleasure are many.The more obvious: taking aging parents out for brunch after church or for dinner later.
This suggestion is embellished with:... the suggestion of eating at a place with a  lovely view or beautiful gardens to make the outing more special....a restaurant where aging parents who don't get out much can take a short walk (use a wheel chair or walker if necessary) so they can enjoy looking in shop windows, see normal activity....anything that includes grandchildren.When the Easter meal is at a family member's home and older parents want to bring a special dish, by all means accept the offer.
It feels good to participate.Then there are older people who are alone and find it difficult to go out.
A visit is welcome with or without a little gift.
However, below are some gift suggestions:...bring a little lunch or snack ("nothing big," I'm told) to share while you talk...be sensitive to sugar and/or salt restrictions...bring a living plant that isn't fussy.
Check at a nursery or flower shop--suggestions: (philodendron [sweetheart plant], fern [nephrolepis], spathiphyllum [peace lilly--wallisi variety] or kalanchoe)....bring flowers.
They brighten up a room....bring a blooming  plant for those who still like to gardenAlthough Passover is almost over, one 89-year-old adviser proudly tells me she made: chopped liver, matzo balls, gefilte fish, and horse radish for the Seder.
Not easy at 89, but she says she was able "to work it out so I could make everything ahead."
And best of all perhaps for her, "It was a good feeling because everyone wanted to take some home and there wasn't enough left.
"This final story comes from the West Coast.
There were no children to look for the traditional hidden matzo at the Passover Seder this year, so the oldest guests were sent on the hunt.
An 86-year-old male guest found the hidden matzo.
While not traditional, life today with children and grandchildren living near is not as prevalent as in times past.
So it would seem that adaptation, flexibility, inclusion and thoughtful creativity go a long way towards helping parents and others age well, especially during the holidays.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 30, 2010>
Keeping up With the Time: Changing Clocks and Gadgets Palm Sunday.
I visited an independent, involved, highly respected widow in her early 80's, M.  She is a smart, welcoming, comfortable-to-be-with, common-sense person.
Conversations with her have substance.
You can count on her balanced way of looking at life for good, sound advice.Her married son lives half an hour away and has a demanding job, as does his wife.
They are supportive and don't interfere; although they are more than willing to offer help and do-- as appropriate.
Yet M tries not to impose.
She likes to handle things herself.
I have invited her to be one of my blog advisors.Sitting in her living room on a sofa facing a clock on a far-away wall, I realized that I had stayed longer than planned.
But our discussion was substantive and time just whizzed by.
When I mentioned the wall clock showed it was time for me to go, she informed me the clock didn't have the correct time.
Indeed the time hadn't been right "for ages" and she'd planned to get it fixed but didn't get around to it.I'd noticed the second hand going around and the time advancing, mentioned what I'd seen, and asked if she'd like me to take a close look at the clock.
I'm no clock repair-person, and she warned me the clock was high up and might be heavy.
So, not wanting to take over, I jokingly acknowledged my lack of repair expertise, but offered to take down the clock and have a look if she'd like.
She agreed and stood by my side to help.Turns out the clock was light, easy to handle, was plugged into a wall outlet; and it was easy to reset.
I think the time was incorrect due to daylight savings time and power outages over the years, because I checked today; it's keeping time.
M tells me not having an incorrect clock constantly reminding her it needed attention makes her feel better.
A little thing.
Then something else occurred to me.Aging parents or any old people on ladders is problematical.
So who changes clocks that may be above a kitchen sink or in other hard-to-get-to places?
And what about the--for me--tricky thermostat clock (which I left for my husband to change when we went on daylight savings time)?
Can older parents change the clock on the coffee maker, microwave, car, and latest gadgets--some of which may be gifts from us?
When we go on and off daylight savings time in the spring and fall, might it be helpful to older parents and friends if we offer to reset their clocks?
Could it be another of those little things that mean a lot and help to make life easier?
Could it be one more ingredient to help parents age well?
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 27, 2010>
Reactions to Tuesday's "Little Things Mean a Lot" PostAs you know I'm a far-away-living child of an aging parent (mother-in-law) ...not an aging parent.
Nevertheless I must admit a few "little things" have meant a lot since Tuesday's post.
I want to share them.First: an elderly widow tells about months of frustration with "ify" TV reception and a sporadically shrill noise on her telephone that repair people tried unsuccessfully to fix for months.
Then her son came to town and spent an afternoon providing a fix for these frustrating problems.She writes: "You have no idea how wonderful it is to have the wireless phone system...It has alleviated so much stress for me.
Along with the necessary digital updating of the TV, my energy level has improved decidedly with these problems solved."
(Her son bought her a Panasonic phone system at Best Buy for under $100 that  includes a base and three portable phones.
I believe Costco advertises  the same set in its Money-Saving booklet that arrived in this  week's mail.
)The writer also wanted to tell adult children: "You have no idea what a word of encouragement means to an aging parent."
So--confirmation that little things--be they words or deeds-- do make a positive difference in an aging parent's life.
It reaffirms my blog's mission--doing what we can to help parents age well.Second: Receiving compliments means a lot.
So thanks to the writer of http://asourparentsage.wordpress.com who emailed me mid-week:"Wow!
Great Blog-- Love Yesterday's Post.
I have read your wonderful blog, Help!
Aging  Parents, more than a few  times, so I have now listed it on my blog, As  Our Parents Age, in the  "Great Blog Writing" link category.
"*With Palm Sunday, Passover and Easter upon us, there are many opportunities to do a "little thing" that can mean a lot to aging parents and to the other older people we care about.
*                *             **She, as well as others, said they had trouble posting comments in the   "Comments" space below.
Thus she emailed me at http://helpagingparents@gmail.com  (see sidebar).. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 23, 2010>
You know those little things that are irritating because we should take care of them--or have them taken care of--but haven't?--like the button from a favorite coat or sweater that we meant to sew (or have someone sew) on;--the shoe that's been needing a repair that we couldn't wear the other day when we wanted to;--the knife we've been meaning to sharpen or get sharpened that made a mess of cutting that tomato;--or some battery-using device whose battery has died and not been replaced?We adult children know we are self-sufficient and can take care of these problems at will, albeit when time in our over-busy schedule permits.
We know too how good we feel when these  annoyances have been taken care of.But what about aging parents?
If they don't drive, they are dependent on others to take things for repair or replacement.
If they're old, technological malfunctions that may be a second-nature fix for younger people and grandchildren are frustrating, causing insecurity and necessitating a dependency on others.Are we aware how often others--service people, for instance--disappoint, even if their intentions are good?
And as our parents age, the people they have counted on  to provide services--be they doctors, painters, tailors, plumbers---you name it--retire, move away or die.In the olden days, families members more often than not lived in the same town and would gather once a week for a meal after church or regularly for dinner one night a week.
I am told this regularly planned family get-together offered a continuity of support to older family members, giving them an opportunity to mention things that needed attention in their homes, after which one family member would volunteer to take care of the situation.
"The stress (of things that are in disrepair or not taken care of) begins to build up," confides a widowed aging parent.
"It's hard not knowing if or when, for example, my clogged drain will be fixed.
"One of my senior advisors says that kind of stress could simply be alleviated if an adult child or another caring younger person could be counted on to come over once a week on a regular basis--for an hour even--to help take care of the simple things (and bring a container of Draino).
"Just knowing that you can depend on that once-a-week visit would alleviate the stress that begins to build up," she says.So take note: It sounds like just an hour a week of our time--to help take care of whatever our parents might need us to do--is another way of helping older parents (as well as other older people who are special to us) age well.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 20, 2010>
Airports--and Answering MachinesAn octogenarian tells me that I neglected to  mention answering machine messages in Tuesday's post that discusses imperfect hearing and the problems aging parents can have understanding unseen voices that convey important information.
How thoughtless of me.
How astute of her!Haven't we all--young or old--received  messages on answering machines and voice mail where important  information (a call-back number, a meeting time, even the name of the  caller) is said so quickly or softly it's unintelligible, even when  replayed at a higher volume?Evidently one smart  80-something-year-old woman with hearing problems has put the following instructive message on her answering machine: "please speak slowly and clearly and loud enough when  leaving your message."
Adult children can and should mention this  message idea to older parents, especially those hampered by hearing loss.
It makes sense for so many reasons.
And  asking if parents want to put the message on by themselves or have help  doing it shouldn't seem like an intrusion.
It's so sensible and scores another  plus in our efforts to help  our parents age well.
*       *      *Now airport  strategies: While I clearly oppose the concept of becoming parents to  our parents (unless our parents are mentally incapable), there are two  potentially helpful strategies for getting around in airport terminals that can alleviate worries for older people while contributing to their adult children's peace of mind.The first concerns a provision that allows parents to accompany  unaccompanied minors to the gate, which of course necessitates  identification etc.
etc.
and can vary from airline to airline.
But it has a flip side that enables adult children to accompany their aging parents to the gate in the same way parents arrange to  accompany their young children to the gate.
Simply the thought of having a responsible family member there is supportive and can reduce worry for aging parents.
It can make the getting-to-the-gate-and-on-the-plane aspect--which is stressful at best these days--relatively stress-free.Some  of my friends were critical of the fact that I "let" my father  travel  alone on airplanes when he was in his early 90's; my  mother-in-law  travels alone at age 96.
It seems logical that once up in the air flight  attendants are  better trained than we (unless we've had special  training) to handle problems that occur.
Initially I got the special  pass to accompany my father and my mother-in-law to the gate, because  they both  liked to--and could--walk.
Assuming a responsible, punctual  person can be at the other end to meet aging--and elderly-- parents, is  there any reason why people in their 80's and 90's shouldn't fly alone?The  second strategy involves the wheel-chair.
As terminals grow, walking  distances increase, and at a certain point, both my father and my  mother-in-law ended up ordering wheel chairs to get them efficiently to  the boarding area.
It's reassuring to know that attendants not only  push wheel chairs and see that passengers get on the correct plane  easily, but provide another set of eyes and ears and they're usually  pleasant companions.
In addition, a wheel chair can make a  carry-on-bag--often  too heavy for older people--easy to bring along.
(When my dad learned about the carry-on luggage option, he gave up walking and enjoyed wheel chair rides for the last 2 years of his life.
)Travel  is invigorating; we all know that.
It adds knowledge, fosters relationships, can provide  some exercise and usually provides fun.
All are a plus for aging well.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 16, 2010>
When Speaking Clearly Can Make a Big DifferenceHave you ever wondered how well someone with imperfect (or sometimes even perfect) hearing can understand what an unseen voice is saying?Think aging or elderly parents--or even yourself--calling an office where the person answering the phone rattles off the name of the business so quickly it's unclear whether the intended party has been reached.
Usually there's a chance to confirm with a human being that you have reached the intended phone number.
But what if the voice delivers important messages over a loudspeaker?I was at the airport yesterday, waiting to board a flight.
The gate was in the back corner of the very crowded terminal.
Thus two gates were at right angles as were their lines to board two flights--which happened to be leaving for different destinations at the same time.
Announcements for many departing flights were continually blaring over the loudspeaker--some in understandable English, some in heavily accented English, and some in very good English that was spoken so quickly you couldn't catch all of it.A lady and a man were trying to help an elderly woman who hadn't heard all of the first boarding announcement for her flight: the announcement welcoming people needing extra time etc.
to board first.
The helpful lady and man were standing in separate, big lines so close together I assumed they were husband and wife.
In actuality they were strangers, but they were the kind of people you hoped would be near your aging parent if he or she ever needed help.The elderly, nicely dressed woman was, I observed, legitimately flustered because she knew she missed part of the announcement.
She questioned the helpful lady who confirmed that the elderly woman could be boarding at that moment.
Yet there was a crush of people making it impossible for her to move to the front of the line.
That's where the helpful man got involved.
He overheard the conversation as did I, got out of his place in line and--as if on a football team but gentler--blocked for the elderly woman and eased her way to the ticket taker so she could comfortably board the plane before the crowd.The helpful man returned to his place in the line, spoke with the initially-helpful lady, I interjected my observation that they were both very thoughtful, and we talked about how difficult it was to hear the boarding announcements during a busy time in a crowded airport.
Are the people responsible for giving important information--be it on the telephone or in public places like airports--aware of the necessity of speaking clearly?As we try to support--not reduce--older parents' quality of life, it makes sense to think about common situations, such as hearing loss, that can impact outcomes and cause anxiety.
While airports can be a challenge waiting to happen for older people, two solutions that don't rely on the kindness of others, will be the subject of Saturday's post.
Helping an aging parent to feel comfortable flying alone affords opportunities to travel, visit family.
It's empowering.
It enriches life.
And each time we can support our aging parents' quality of life, we are helping them to age well.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, March 12, 2010>
A Trial Transportation Program That Can Help Aging ParentsPhoenix is a city where cars prevail and public transportation options for non-driving seniors, although increasing, are still quite limited.
I learned that a monthly pamphlet, about city affairs, accompanies the water bill and this month announced a small scale experiment aimed at improving the transportation situation.
(I understand there was also a short article in the newspaper, but of course not all older people read the newspaper.)
The notice is copied below:*              *             *City offers seniors reduced taxi faresConcerned about the heavy demand for the city's Dial-A-Ride service, Phoenix Public Transit has initiated a pilot program that allows seniors to ride taxis at reduced rates.Funded jointly by the city and the federal government, the Senior Cab voucher program is seen as alternative public transportation for persons 65 and older.About 400 seniors are being signed up to take part in the pilot program that is expected to last about 19 months, after which the city will decide if it should be made a permanent addition to its transportation offerings.Senior cab was developed at the request of the City Council, which asked the Transit Department to explore alternative modes of transporting seniors because Dial-A-Ride has increased demand for Americans with Disabilities Act-certified users, making it increasing unavailable to seniors.Participants each month can buy up to four $10-voucher books for $3 each, which is 30 percent of their value.
The vouchers can be used for an entire trip, combined with cash fares to travel further or banked over several months for a longer trip.
Riders are responsible for their own gratuity.For more information call (number given, I've omitted it).
*            *             *While only an experiment, it's a creative idea that I'm thinking some readers might want to share with their town or city officials.
Let me know what you think.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 9, 2010>
When our goal is to help aging parents regain an interest in life, assuming they once had it (if they never did, a behavior change is unlikely), it makes sense to keep two issues in mind: our parents' flexibility as well as our own.
These issues will impact the ease and satisfaction of reaching our goal--be it to have our parents leave their home or apartment to go anywhere but the doctor or to once again become engaged in life.Young people who are basically healthy (physically and emotionally) are usually fairly elastic--physically more flexible and emotionally more able to rebound unscathed from emotional upsets.
(Think teenagers, who are in despair  one day and on top of the world the next.)
But at a certain point in the aging process this elasticity or flexibility begins to decrease.
If this weren't the case, why are there countless exercise programs and where did that old saying "You can't teach an old dog new tricks" come from?The analogy, that speaks to the mental part of this equation, conveys the idea that old dogs are set in their ways--inflexible; not  a flattering analogy to an aging parent to be sure.
And yet most adult children  of aging, old and very old parents have probably experienced the inflexibility--sometimes puzzling-- that comes with age.Do older people seem inflexible because hanging onto certain ways of doing things that have worked for them in the past gives a sense of security that they don't want to put at risk?
And how elastic are we, in understanding the insecurities and reasons that seem to frustrate our attempts when we try to help?We ponder these questions and how they impact vacationing with aging parents and providing other opportunities to help them regain or increase their interest in life; and we realize one size doesn't fit all.
But if we keep flexibility in mind, as well as the importance of empowering, and if we think about using the "I need your help" phrase when appropriate, we can hopefully find at least some of these strategies useful as we try to help our parents age well.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, March 6, 2010>
Additional Ideas to Engage and Invigorate Spring does exist for those living in the hard-hit-by-winter East--the moment they enter the Philadelphia Flower Show.
It does wonders to help older parents' spirits as well as our own, even when we must return to our homes with inches of accumulated frozen snow in the yard.
So what other attraction could provide that "pop" for aging parents?
Before leaving the subject of flower shows--if they are of interest--Google "flower shows" and shows all over the country are at your finger tips.
Click "flower shows 2010" and check out Chicago--March 6-14; Portland Me.--March 11-14; Chicago and San Francisco--March 24-28 and Newport RI--June 25-27 to name a few.
There are boat shows, car shows, etc., some of which should appeal to apathetic aging parents.
If music and theater hold more appeal, check out:           <!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} a:link, span.MsoHyperlink 	{color:blue; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} a:visited, span.MsoHyperlinkFollowed 	{mso-style-noshow:yes; 	color:purple; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->               <!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} a:link, span.MsoHyperlink 	{color:blue; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} a:visited, span.MsoHyperlinkFollowed 	{mso-style-noshow:yes; 	color:purple; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->    Tanglewood in Lenox, Mass.
The Boston Symphony presents outstanding musical programs during the summer--indoors and outdoors.
Located in the Berkshires, the surroundings are beautiful and it's very popular with older people.
Bring a picnic if you wish, but do check the weather forecast.
The Shakespearean Festival, Ashland, Oregon.
This is a favorite summer destination, now in its 75th year, and the quality of the productions is well known.
Ashland is a picturesque town not far from the California border.
While the pear trees in Ashland are the delicious variety used in Harry and David's famous fruit gift packages, there is also a well-remembered, disgusting-tasting mineral water, Lithia water, that comes from an underground source.
Dad stopped to make us drink some from a fountain in the park anytime we drove through Ashland when we were kids.
Said it would help us live to 100.
He died at 94.
Hmmm.
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} a:link, span.MsoHyperlink 	{color:blue; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} a:visited, span.MsoHyperlinkFollowed 	{mso-style-noshow:yes; 	color:purple; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->             <!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} a:link, span.MsoHyperlink 	{color:blue; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} a:visited, span.MsoHyperlinkFollowed 	{mso-style-noshow:yes; 	color:purple; 	text-decoration:underline; 	text-underline:single;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->     
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, March 2, 2010>
First Aid For Languishing SeniorsIt may be puzzling when an energetic, productive mother or father succumbs to almost couch-potato status after retirement or another major life-changing event.
But who wouldn't feel bad and lack initiative when, to cite but one example, being able to drive anyone, anywhere, any time for most of a lifetime comes to a halt.And while medications can help relieve this kind of symptom, especially useful if it has lasted over several months, the presenting problems remain--most likely under the umbrella of loss.
Depending on the specifics of the situation--loss of a spouse or cherished friend, loss of a certain kind of control, loss of routine, loss of the ability to get involved at will in activities, and loss of the ability to get in the car and connect with friends and family and go places whenever--the inertia can be triggered.
You can undoubtedly add to the list.The question then-- what can adult children do to help older parents become engaged again?
We discussed jump starts in an earlier post.
We know getting involved is a start and we know being with friends and family is, in most cases, good medicine.
We also know that looking forward to an upcoming event may have as much psychological value as attending or participating in the event itself and can last over many weeks, even longer.
It can begin to encourage an aging parent--or anyone for that matter--out of "the dumps.
"Thus, I want to mention several well-known events in the next few posts that involve travel (more or less depending on distance involved) and are special, memorable, and can continue to inspire well after the event has taken place.Taking aging parents on a day trip, short trip, or vacation can be a highlight if it's planned well and talked about in advance.
The kind of trip I envision is sort of like a school field trip, meant to be enriching, but for adults.
Unlike school field trips, however,  and unlike organized tours, taking parents with you offers much more flexibility and individualization for them, the fun of participating in something together, and may cost less.Today I want to introduce-because it's going on now,The Philadelphia Flower Show (Philadelphia, Pa.)--renamed this year the Philadelphia International Flower Show.
It was the nation's first flower show back in 1829.
Since that show, which exhibited a bird-of-paradise from the Cape of Good hope and a new plant, a poinsettia, from Mexico, international influences and contributions that have been integral to this awesome undertaking.Listed in 1,000 Places to See Before You Die   (along with places like the Taj Mahal in India), it is extraordinary.
It's "on" this week and I had the pleasure of being there yesterday.
At the box office a husband was overheard saying to his wife: "Are there senior discounts?"
She replied: "Look around...almost everyone would get a discount."
It's a favorite  or it obviously wouldn't have made the 1,000 Places book.
And clearly older parents--and aging parents and old parents--enjoy it.Saturday's post will bring two more special additions to the list.In the meantime, please share your knowledge of special places that aging parents and adult children can enjoy together so we can add the to the list.
(Email me by clicking the helpagingparents address  on the sidebar.)
And if you're in the Philadelphia area this week, give some thought to the Philadelphia Flower Show when considering adding stimulation, education, relaxation, and fun to older parents' lives....as well as to your own.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, February 26, 2010>
It's so natural to cuddle babies.
Dr.  Spock wrote in the 1940's, "when you hug him or make noises at him, when  you show him that you think he's the most wonderful baby in the world,  it makes his spirit grow, just the way milk makes his bones grow.
"At the other end of the life cycle, do we nourish aging parents' spirits?How often do aging  parents receive a hug, a kiss, an  affectionate squeeze?
How often are  they touched in a caring way, a  way that conveys affection, a way that conveys shared joy?
(Do loyal grandparents who attend every athletic competition  get high-fives or a hug from jubilant grandchildren after the game?
)When parents can grow old together caring touches undoubtedly continue; but what about elderly parents who are living alone  either because they never married or have lost their spouse?
I pose this question in the introduction to the "self-esteem section" in my yet-to-be-published book.
And then, this past week, NY Times published an article, in the Health/Mind category, Evidence That Little Touches Do Mean So Much.
While we realize some older people do remarry, in so many families there will be elderly family members, living alone for whom the warmth generated from a touch by children, nieces, nephews and other caring people will be in short supply.Yet the Times article adds another aspect, telling us that the body interprets a supportive touch as "I'll share the load."
This is the signal we get from a caring, affirming touch.In sum, a caring touch can be a very positive, meaningful gesture for aging parents...a gesture in which all family members (and caring friends) can participate in order to add another ingredient to helping older parents age well.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 23, 2010>
Four Words That Can  Change Resistance to Compliance"I need your help."
These four words are  powerful.
They can do more to help aging parents do what's best and  what's right than any other phrase I know.
I learned the value of this  phrase from a counseling colleague and have used it successfully in my  counseling with temporarily irrational parents, difficult kids, and  seemingly inflexible teachers and administrators.And I've used  it with strangers--to untangle airline reservations, to speak with a  supervisor when all else was failing, and with family and friends-- when  appropriate.
I use this phrase  only when I do need help.
It has never  disappointed."Why?"
you ask.
"And where does helping aging  parents fit in?Let's elaborate.
When you say to someone "I need your help," the  implied message is that the person you're speaking to is capable and that's flattering.
People rarely turn  down that simple request.
(Contrast that with "can you help me?"
Notice how it allows for refusal?
)"I need your help" also psychologically pulls the  other person into your space giving him or her a vested interest in helping to resolve the  problem.
You've appealed to his or her ego (self-esteem) by admitting you  need his or her help.
This makes aging parents feel good and clearly not  threatened, providing a nice way to begin a potentially difficult conversation.
You and they become partners in solving the problem.I don't believe we are our parents' parents...not until our  parents ask us to take over or we know from a doctor that they are no  longer capable of decision-making.
So when adult children say "I need  your help"  to an aging parent, the mere statement is respectful and affirming.
"I need your help" is as applicable to the big issues, like driving or changing living arrangements, as it is to the smaller ones; but if we overuse it, it loses its effect--as we undoubtedly know.
Parents don't like being talked down to, lectured  to, or being  told--point blank--what to do.
"I need your help" is a good way to begin a thorny conversation.
And I stress "begin."
When you begin any other way, it dilutes what you're trying to accomplish.So try the "I need your help" statement especially in a situation that you think parents may initially reject or resist, even though it's for their own good.
When adult children can help their aging parents to buy into a solution, it's better for everyone--and sometimes generates worthwhile ideas no one thought of before.
And when an adult child, who's trying to help aging parents, begins by admitting he or she needs their help, shouldn't the collaboration have a better chance for success?PS.
When life and limb are involved and parents are resistant, a parent's physician is often in the best position to makes suggestion, if "I need you help" should fail.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 20, 2010>
Aging Parent, Stepmother, Adult Children, Inheritance(from an edited [to protect privacy] email, responded to individually of course) Dear Susan,There are issues regarding inheritance.
My sister (who lives in another state) and I don't know how to approach our 90-year-old father and get around our stepmother, in order to have meaningful conversations and avoid confrontation and any kind of negatives!
We have not been successful thus far, and wonder if we need to hire a family attorney to document our issues and help us look out for our interests.
Dad is private, accustomed to having things his way, and aging fast.
Unfortunately he is married to a mean, difficult woman.
Can you give us some help?
* * *This situation is such a common aging parent situation when "mean" stepmothers are involved; and it's never easy.
It also sounds like the father is a man who doesn't want to give up control and--if I'm correct--speaking with him would, I think, need to be attempted by whichever child has the best relationship with him--at an unemotional time when they're alone--obviously.This kind of conversation, in my counseling experience, never goes well unless the person initiating the conversation can feel comfortable doing so.
Easier said than done.
If such a conversation is attempted, I think it's preferable if it can be attached to something NOT emotionally charged.
For example, last fall when Brooke Astor's estate was in the news--it could perhaps have provided a springboard for the conversation (as it did for my October post about wills).
Astor news 2/23/10 Note update If, in this case, the sisters decide one of them will speak with their father and he's the kind of man who values control, I think it would be important for an underlying theme in the conversation to be respect for him and for his decisions.
She should trust her instincts, assuming they have served her well in the past, and if she senses nastiness in the offing she might do well to back off.Why?Because in my limited experience I know that the law is the law and if the father is of sound mind when the will is drawn up, as far as I know, contesting it only creates nastiness and changes nothing--sadly.
But an attorney is the one to speak to about that.The highly regarded attorney who advised for the October post, read the above and added the following information concerning provisions for an aging parent's adult children and the stepmother.
"One possible solution, he said, "is for the father, in this case, to have attorneys set up a trust for the stepmother during her lifetime, with the remainder going to the father's adult children upon the stepmother's death."I hope this information will be helpful to many adult children and to their aging parents as well. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 16, 2010>
Organized aging parents--their comfort zone: no surprises, they value planning ahead.
With thanks to Senior Advisor R, today's post focuses on the mode some aging parents prefer to live their life in.
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->&#160; R has errands and I plan to pick her up.
Trying to be considerate of an aged parent I suggest we aim for 11am.
Said I would phone around 9:30.
"You can call as early as 7," she said.
"What I don't want to do is have to rush.
If you wake me, it's fine.
I'll have the information and can go back to sleep.
I  don't want to rush to get ready....and that's something you should put in  your blog so adult children will realize at a certain point, aging  parents don't like to rush."
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;}  R. elaborates--says she can't speak for all aging parents, but being on time is important to her.
(Although in her 90's, she still goes out a lot.)
To do that comfortably, however, it takes time--more time than most of us would spend getting ready.
I think it's safe to say most--if not all--of us realize older people slow down; they simply take more time than younger people to do things.
It's why R likes to plan well ahead.
(Doesn't like surprises, she says.)
No doubt it gives her a feeling of control which, of course, supports independence.
So I will telephone R once I know when I can pick her up--even as early as 7am.
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->  I got to thinking: I, like most of us, live life on fast forward the majority of the time.
Too much to do, not enough time to do it in.
I probably rush unconsciously.
I try to organize and structure my time, but something unforeseen gets squeezed into my schedule more often than not.
It's the way life is today.
In spite of that, scheduling time to be with R is sacrosanct.
I let nothing get in the way.
So I'll be mindful of not speeding on the freeway to her home, even if I'm rushing to be on time.
I don't want to keep her waiting--not one minute; but then again, I must admit I'd hate to get a speeding ticket.
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} --> 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 13, 2010>
         <!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->    An Aging Parent's Figure: Clothes That Fit  Can you wear those jeans you wore in high school?
What about the dress or shorts you wore in college, the wedding gown or tux fitted specially for that big occasion?
Shapes change and many style conscious men and women pay attention and make the effort to look good the moment they're aware that their clothes are no longer fitting or flattering.
On the other hand, waning energy and less good eyesight can lead to poorly fitting clothes without our parents noticing or doing anything about it  If we see that our parents are neglecting to make the effort to look good, we can try the strategies suggested in the last two posts.
If those don't resonate, having clothes tailored by a tailor or dressmaker is a third option, especially when parents hate parting with clothing.
Adult children who live near aging parents, can assess some of their clothing with them and mutually decide on the clothing that can use an "adjustment." With the exception of those handy with a needle and thread and a sewing machine, having a professional do alterations on selected articles of clothing is no doubt less expensive than purchasing new clothes and can do wonders to remove the frumpy-dumpy look.
So aren't alterations worth a try?
Since Valentine's Day is here, the opportunity for a small wardrobe update is also here.
Assuming a Valentine's gift of new clothing hasn't been given already, does a Valentine-IOU-gift of new clothing or clothing alterations make sense?
Happy Valentine's Day!        
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 9, 2010>
Aging and Appearance: A Personal Shopper for Aging Parents?
Who?
You?Z at age three in North Carolina already has favorite clothes...and favorite colors: pink and red.
Ideas about what we wear seem to begin early.
Yet not everyone is clothes conscious with a priority of looking good.
Our Prada parents are, but aging parents in the Dumpy group probably aren't.Some aging parents would dress to improve their appearance if:--they could easily get to a store (addressed in last post),--they thought they had the money to buy new clothes,--trying on clothes in fitting rooms didn't take so much effort,--they had confidence in their taste in clothing.So what's a child to do when he or she wants to ensure that aging parents look good, are less apt to be treated as "old" by strangers and have healthy self-esteem?
Take on the role of a personal shopper of course.
Thankless?
Perhaps.
Professional personal shoppers get paid for their time on the job, have benefits if they're employed by a store, and develop a loyal following if they do a good job.
Adult children will forgo all of these rewards.
Never-the-less, having parents who feel good about themselves pays other dividends such as contributing to their adult children's peace of mind.Older people may think a dated, perhaps ill-fitting, comfortable wardrobe is adequate.
Those of us who hate to part with worn, comfortable shoes can understand this.
So a key thought is to get parents to buy into the idea of your shopping to add whatever they'd like to their wardrobe.
One 80-something-year-old widow said I would love it if my son said, "Mother, I'd like to buy you a new blue sweater...unless you'd prefer another color."
She liked the idea of a new sweater, she said, and blue was her favorite color.
But being given a choice appealed to her.
That, of course, is a small start.
But don't many things begin with a small start?The more information we have about color, size, and style the more successful we can be.
We also benefit from knowing about any physical conditions that affect aging parents' clothing choice.
For example, I remember a designer two-piece outfit on sale that became a real bargain when the coupon I had further reduced the price.
It was Mother's favorite color, her size.
I bought it and had it sent to her, never realizing she had become self-conscious about her arms.
To this day I don't know if it was because they had become thin, wrinkled, flabby or what.
And I was unaware she had stopped wearing clothes with short sleeves until she told me.
Lesson learned.
Ask your parents not only about preferences but also about things to avoid.
Then make certain to know about a store's policy on "returns.
"Since we want to avoid taking over anything while our parents are mentally capable (unless we want to create dependency), collaborating (a popular  concept today) with parents makes sense.
Initially it takes more time.
Eventually we see what works and what doesn't and develop the instincts of a professional personal shopper.Who knows?
We may decide to give up our day job!
What we do know is that we can help aging parents to look good.
And that never goes out of style.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, February 6, 2010>
        <!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->   Aging and Appearance: Shopping for Clothes    Today's focus: helping aging parents in the middle group--those between Prada and Dumpy--to look better.
That's the group Eloise, an unforgettable friend of my parents going back to high school and college days, compared to an old car.
In her mid-eighties, she laughingly told me: First, the rear view mirror comes loose, next there's a dent in the fender.
Then the tail pipe falls off.
Not major problems for older people really, they just need a little fixing and a paint job, she quipped.
The paint job, while painless, does require thought and planning.
* * * *Energy is a prime consideration  when shopping with aging parents.
If we tire them out, they may never  attempt it again.
And for our own well being it  makes sense to factor in our available time.
We want to avoid pressure  caused by time constraints if the shopping experience is to be a good  one.
If a younger woman announces "I'm shopped out," to her friend as they emerge from the dressing rooms, arms full of clothing, what's it like for much older men and women to go shopping, especially those who don't--or no longer--make the effort to dress better?
R's wig shopping experience http://helpparentsagewell.blogspot.com/2010/01/aging-parents-and-wigs.html can provide an insight and a model.
Initially it took a few tries to settle on the day.
An unexpected problem occurred, thus we had to reschedule.
While flexibility on our part is important, having a plan in place is more than important.
It's a necessity.
It saves time and prevents "running out of steam."  R planned the schedule with me.
She knows herself well and decided one wig shop, a break for lunch, then the cancer center's open-to-non-patients, well-known wig shop was all she could handle at age 96.
It all worked.
When our goal is realistic and we  accomplish it, we feel good!
Because we had a specific goal, going to a mall wasn't in our plan.
However to save time and energy, shopping at a mall with parents is practical.
Weather isn't an issue and parents get some exercise without walking huge distances.
If we prepare ahead--deciding what new clothing is most needed/wanted, where we think we can buy it and where we want to eat--it works!
And it can be fun too.
Although R doesn't wear them, good looking, elastic waist pantsuits are comfortable and easy to find for aging mothers with less-than-perfect figures.
And there are slacks with adjustable waistbands, for aging fathers, that look great.
These may be excellent choices to replace comfortable, baggy sweat pants (or worse) especially when parents go out.
Since we know nothing succeeds like success, a successful shopping trip can trigger an older parent's interest in his or her appearance.
When old people look good, the chances for demeaning remarks from strangers decrease and the chances for compliments increase.
And while we might not realize it, our aging parents don't get that many compliments any more.
So when they make the effort to wear new clothes and look good, we need to recognize that and tell them.
Who doesn't like a legitimate compliment!
And it reinforces behavior (in this case looking good) too.                  
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, February 2, 2010>
         <!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:Arial; 	panose-1:2 11 6 4 2 2 2 2 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;} -->    Aging and Appearance: Clothes Suddenly it happens!
We find ourselves talking about our aging parents, like we used to talk about our children.
"My mother is 90, stylish, has a Prada handbag," says one adult daughter.
Think back.
We recall that not all parents could honestly brag about their children, just as not all adult children can brag about their aging parents.
Some parents will age gracefully and well and their adult children will be proud; others won't and this often causes problems.
Then there's always a large group in the middle.
That group is the focus of today's post and several to follow.
If our relatively independent  aging parents fall into that middle group when it comes to dress/style,  let's consider how we can ensure--without sounding critical--that  they always look well-put-together.
By doing this we accomplish two goals:  --One, people are more apt to react positively to aging parents  who looks "in order" than to a  frumpy, dumpy looking aging individual, because people react initially to what they see.
This in turn can enhance parental self-esteem and even confidence as opposed to diminishing it.
--Two, when we look better, we feel  better and when we feel better, we look better.
I think this is true for most--if not all--of us.
So if we want to help parents age well, there's a lot to be gained if they look well-put together.
It's pretty easy for young people to look relatively good.
But as people age, looking good takes more energy, more time, and more attention to detail than we might realize.
The older they get, "the harder it gets" according to my eighty and ninety-year-old advisors.
Clothing styles need to be age appropriate or they look silly, or they may be dated.
(Sometimes it's hard to part with old clothes.)
And clothes must fit properly to avoid the saggy, baggy, poorly-proportioned look that we often see.
Sweat pants, which usually look fine on younger people, may feel good but can be unflattering to aging figures.
When we know it's in their best interest, yet we don't want to seem controlling or critical, how do we encourage aging parents to take pride in their appearance?
--We can go shopping with them and make it a fun occasion.--We can become their personal shopper, with their permission, and bring them a selection of clothing to choose from (then return what's not wanted).
--We can have a dress maker or tailor fit their current clothing to their changing/changed figure (taking in, letting out, shortening etc.
).--We can gift them with clothing on special occasions: three that come quickly to mind are birthdays, Mother's and Father's Days, and Christmas or Chanukah.
Give thought to these ideas.
Saturday's post will elaborate.              
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 30, 2010>
We all know that one size doesn't fit all.
Does that relate to medications?
Does a big man take the same dose of medicine (the dose marked "For Adults" on the bottle) as an 80-year-old woman or a petite 50-year-old  woman?
Do older adults--aging parents whose whose physical bodies have often shrunk since their younger days-- require the same "adult dose" as when they were younger adults?Being a very instruction-abiding person (I worked in schools remember), I've mulled this question over many times since my husband is big and I am rather petite.
Taking the "adult dose" on a bottle of nonprescription pain killer works for him.
I don't need that much.
I have learned to take less.Thus I read with special interest the Tuesday, January 26th, New York Times Science Section, "Vital Signs" column.
It had a segment, "Tailoring Drug Doses to a Patient's Size," that to me is such common sense I'm surprised someone didn't put it in major headlines a long time ago.http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/20/health/26regimens.html?scp=1&sq=TailoringDrugDoses   &st=cse.Now we read that two doctors, one in Athens, Greece the other a professor of medicine at Tufts Medical School in Boston, have addressed this subject in a medical journal, The Lancet.In my November 3 post, "Old Parents vs.
Vacation Plans," I write about my unplanned return to the US from Italy because my mother was supposedly dying.
I was able to get her quickly to a geriatrician who ordered lab work and x'rays while we waited at the teaching hospital.
It turned out, after looking at the results and the medication list I brought, that medications--too much and some unnecessary--caused the seemingly urgent problems.From then on, whenever medications were discussed, I respectfully mentioned Mother's small size and low weight and asked about the minimum dose she could take and still get the necessary results.
Actually I discuss this with my physicians today.
And I know they take my relatively smaller size into consideration, especially if an antibiotic is involved.The "one size doesn't fit all" concept seems very important when it involves aging parents and their medication.
Yet I think it has merit for adult children too.
If we don't stay healthy and so we can be there for our aging parents, who will be?
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 26, 2010>
My thoughts for today's post, "jump-starting aging parents," were  organized, ready for posting and I will still share them.
However, I  begin--thinking about what hearing from former students could mean to an  aging teacher.
Could that, at the very least, be a psychological jump  start?Today I learned that Mr. W, my high school chemistry teacher who was so important to me that he was the subject of my college application essays, has cancer.
An email arrived this afternoon from a high school classmate, one of my closest friends during those teenage years.
Although separated by 3,000 miles, he updates me about important situations.The thought is that Mr. W would no doubt enjoy hearing from people in our class.
Mr. W is probably in his 80's now, possibly an aging parent.
I tried but couldn't remember whether or not he and his wife have children.The idea of giving back in some small way to people who mean or have meant a lot to us, clearly has merit.
If they mean/meant so much, we are probably special to them.
So although this post was initially intended for adult children of aging parents, I realize the idea of a jump-start is equally relevant for all adult children and applicable to all aging people important in our lives.When we stop and think about it, can't human beings of all ages use a jump start now and then?
No doubt there have been days when we've all felt lackluster; when our spirits needed lifting; when we would rather stay in bed than get up and have to perform whatever's expected of us.
But we usually can't languish (unless we're seriously depressed), because of family demands, expectations of friends and colleagues, and because our circle of contacts and our ongoing involvements coax us mentally to get up and get going.Most aging parents in the chronologically younger group, no doubt have many people and activities in their lives; thus many possibilities to trigger the jump-start mechanism exist.
As people become chronologically older, however, the outside influences in their lives lessen, their support group dwindles and a needed jump-start may be harder to come by.A jump-start takes many forms; but in all cases it makes people feel better and can be empowering--the unexpected phone call, anticipation of something to look forward to (like a grandchild's visit), a spontaneous invitation, a surprise visit, invited participation in some endeavor.
Far-away living adult children often find the simple fact that they've come to visit provides a jump-start for their aging parents.
The possibilities are only limited by our imagination.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 23, 2010>
Are We Controlling?
Do We Have a Hidden Agenda?Our wig-shopping spree over, my husband's mother, R, said she could use a little "rest." I've never researched aging parents' idea of a "rest."  Her idea at 96: sitting and talking with her son, my husband, for almost two hours.
(I took a nap.)
Then we all went to R's best friend N's home for a Swedish dinner.If we needed proof that aging parents can organize and cook to perfection for company, we had it!
N, at 86, is an awesome (and I don't use that word lightly) cook.
Even more awesome when you consider her age and the food she prepared.
Our meal--green salad with just-picked grape tomatoes, fresh salmon with dill, the best small potatoes imaginable, creamy spinach, home-baked limpa bread and a Tosca cake for dessert--was equal to that of the finest New York restaurant.The fifth guest was N's child, a daughter in her fifties, who runs a demanding, time-consuming business, yet brought the tomatoes and dill from her garden.
The relationship between N and her daughter is respectful, mutually supportive and obviously loving.
Many daughters' instinct would be to come in and take over when an 86-year-old mother undertakes a "company dinner." We can only imagine how much energy goes into preparing such a dinner--at any age...but at 86?!
This very able daughter did it right.
She quietly helped as needed; but it was clearly her mother's dinner party.I began to think about adult children who insist on taking over major responsibility for holiday family dinners once older mothers reach a certain age.
Reason: They've decided (rightly or wrongly) it's too much work for an aging parent.
Some older parents give in.
Others question the motive, especially that of far-away-living daughters.
These mothers are skeptical.
"They say it makes it easier for us, but I think it makes it easier for them.
It saves them the trouble of bringing the kids (our grandchildren) to us," says one grandmother, who's not yet ready to give up the tradition.Think back to raising children.
Remember how often the experts say that it's important to let a child perhaps struggle a bit but do for him or herself, as opposed to jumping in to help because we can do it better or easier.
This reinforces confidence and self- esteem.
The same reasoning holds true for aging parents, doesn't it?
Don't we want our aging parents to continue to feel competent and proud of the fact that we think they are, when indeed that is true?This brings us to one of our key thoughts:  Assuming there's no threat to life and limb, should we intervene and/or offer suggestions to make it better or easier for ourselves or focus on what makes it better for our parents?
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 19, 2010>
What happens when you put a new wig on an aging parent's head?
Surprise!
At least for me.Neither my husband's mother nor I (I think I can speak for her, she's often more attuned to these kind of things than I) realized that the majority of ready-made, out of the box, and thus less expensive, synthetic wigs are geared for the faces of relatively younger women.
It's not necessarily a problem of hair color; rather it's a problem of style.And when you think about it, it makes sense.
While companies are beginning to act on the realization that people are living well longer, it seems these wig manufacturers are still catering to women who are newly-minted senior citizens and younger.That said, it is possible to purchase synthetic wigs that compliment an older face.
The skill of the people working in the wig boutique/shop is what makes the difference.
For that reason, going on line to purchase a wig (unless you know the style # and have worn that wig previously) is not recommended; neither is using the Yellow Pages to make the initial phone call unless it's to check whether or not the shop has someone who is experienced at thinning down and styling a ready-made wig.
Reason: these wigs are manufactured using a basic, simplistic, universal, oval face as the model and the commercially styled hair is thicker/fuller than the hair of most older people, whose hair often thins due to age.
(This certainly would include many of our parents or we wouldn't be thinking about wigs.
)Aging parents probably want a more conservative hairstyle.
If making the phone call, ask about more conservative hairstyles for older people.
Yes, I know, the styles are for "anyone" but frame an old face with a cool new style and there's a major disconnect.
This doesn't mean a 70-something-year-old, with a young face, can't wear a new style.
The wig may need to be thinned a bit, but it works.
For a 70-something-year-old with a lined or older looking face, however, forget it and go for the more conservative style.
I was curious about men who lose their hair and, as expected, learned women far outnumber men when it comes to purchasing a wig.
Then I was told about a man who came into a wig shop catering to men and women.
He was wearing a hat over his obviously balding head and wanted to purchase a "hairpiece." (I am told the word "toupee" is passe.)
It would have been trimmed and blended into his own hair.
However, he tried on a wig; it looked "awesome."  It was trimmed to compliment his face and "off he went into the sunset without his hat--a happy camper." Michelle, at Wigs Amor and Forever Young in Arizona, says at both shops people come in thinking they know what they want but "more often than not, you like something you weren't expecting."  It may take a while to decide on the right wig for the right natural look.
And older people may not make decisions as quickly as younger ones, possibly because they take less risks and/or want more time to digest things.
So plan on taking some time if you have aging parents who want or need a wig.
One thing I can vouch for: it's not only helpful and supportive to shop for wigs with a mother or mother-in-law; it's fun.
And a lot of laughs!
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 16, 2010>
"Year of birth is 1913," I respond.
Long pause....
"Is that a problem for your computer?" I ask.
"Ummm, I think I can do it."  Another long pause.
"OK.
You have an appointment for a wig fitting."
My husband's mother has been concerned about thinning hair for several years.
She has been doing research and decided on two good wig places.
One is a normal wig store/boutique or whatever they're called, the other a cancer center with an excellent reputation for seeing that patients have natural looking, flattering wigs.
"Most of our clients are much younger...chemo patients," volunteered the obviously much younger woman on the phone.
"I know you said your mother-in-law didn't have cancer; but date of birth information is required for insurance purposes even though you said she won't be using insurance.
1913...she's 96?
Wow!
And she cares how she looks!
I look forward to meeting her."I've now made the appointment at the cancer center (the normal wig store needs no appointment).
Monday will be our day to check things out and hopefully emerge with something to enhance our hair.
I say "our hair" because, although this initially held no interest for me, I have friends in Florida who own wigs so they can look great after a swim--as well as friends who have wigs and "pieces."  This should be fun.
Hair is one of the first things we notice when we look at someone.
Hair, age-appropriately styled and in order (as opposed to messy and unkempt), is as important for the young as it is for aging parents who don't want to look like dumpy old men or little old women--for aging parents who care about appearance.
And now that I think of it, it's also important for adult children to have a vested interest in their parents' appearance.
Why?
If we want to empower and lessen the possibility of strangers categorizing them as old and responding to them in ways that diminish self-esteem, aging parents need to look in order.
Tuesday's post will have the update.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 12, 2010>
Do you know that "family" has been compared to a mobile--a decorative hanging work of balanced art forms, popular in the last half of the 1900's?
When one of the forms is moved, weight shifts and the entire work becomes unbalanced.
To correct this, something must be changed to counter the moved form's weight.
The same holds true for families.
Take a normal two-parent family with children.
If one parent gets sick the other parent will try to help out, or perhaps an aunt or grandmother will come in to help keep things "normal"-- to keep the balance, so to speak.
So what happens when aging-parent issues cause adult children to take their time and emotional energy from the family and reallocate it to aging parents?
Possibly we all know adult children who become consumed by their parents' problems.
It's such an easy trap to fall into.
We read about it in the "Sad Story" post about Rodney and his caring, capable, efficient but overloaded daughter.
http://helpparentsagewell.blogspot.com/2009/12/lesson-from-sad-story.html I just learned there was a price to pay.
Rodney's daughter and her husband have divorced.
<!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:"Courier New"; 	panose-1:2 7 3 9 2 2 5 2 4 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Wingdings; 	panose-1:5 2 1 2 1 8 4 8 7 8; 	mso-font-charset:2; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:0 0 65536 0 -2147483648 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.MsoListParagraph, li.MsoListParagraph, div.MsoListParagraph 	{margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:.5in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.MsoListParagraphCxSpFirst, li.MsoListParagraphCxSpFirst, div.MsoListParagraphCxSpFirst 	{mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:.5in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.MsoListParagraphCxSpMiddle, li.MsoListParagraphCxSpMiddle, div.MsoListParagraphCxSpMiddle 	{mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:.5in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.MsoListParagraphCxSpLast, li.MsoListParagraphCxSpLast, div.MsoListParagraphCxSpLast 	{mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:.5in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.Style1, li.Style1, div.Style1 	{mso-style-name:Style1; 	mso-style-parent:"List Paragraph"; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:39.0pt; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	mso-list:l0 level1 lfo1; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.Style1CxSpFirst, li.Style1CxSpFirst, div.Style1CxSpFirst 	{mso-style-name:Style1CxSpFirst; 	mso-style-parent:"List Paragraph"; 	mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:39.0pt; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	mso-list:l0 level1 lfo1; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.Style1CxSpMiddle, li.Style1CxSpMiddle, div.Style1CxSpMiddle 	{mso-style-name:Style1CxSpMiddle; 	mso-style-parent:"List Paragraph"; 	mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:39.0pt; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	mso-list:l0 level1 lfo1; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.Style1CxSpLast, li.Style1CxSpLast, div.Style1CxSpLast 	{mso-style-name:Style1CxSpLast; 	mso-style-parent:"List Paragraph"; 	mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:39.0pt; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	mso-list:l0 level1 lfo1; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;}  /* List Definitions */ @list l0 	{mso-list-id:2017533234; 	mso-list-type:hybrid; 	mso-list-template-ids:-697529856 201217400 67698691 67698693 67698689 67698691 67698693 67698689 67698691 67698693;} @list l0:level1 	{mso-level-number-format:bullet; 	mso-level-style-link:Style1; 	mso-level-text:&#61623;; 	mso-level-tab-stop:none; 	mso-level-number-position:left; 	margin-left:39.0pt; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	font-family:Symbol;} ol 	{margin-bottom:0in;} ul 	{margin-bottom:0in;} -->   <!--  /* Font Definitions */ @font-face 	{font-family:"Courier New"; 	panose-1:2 7 3 9 2 2 5 2 4 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Wingdings; 	panose-1:5 2 1 2 1 8 4 8 7 8; 	mso-font-charset:2; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:0 0 65536 0 -2147483648 0;} @font-face 	{font-family:Cambria; 	panose-1:2 4 5 3 5 4 6 3 2 4; 	mso-font-charset:0; 	mso-generic-font-family:auto; 	mso-font-pitch:variable; 	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}  /* Style Definitions */ p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal 	{mso-style-parent:""; 	margin:0in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.MsoListParagraph, li.MsoListParagraph, div.MsoListParagraph 	{margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:.5in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.MsoListParagraphCxSpFirst, li.MsoListParagraphCxSpFirst, div.MsoListParagraphCxSpFirst 	{mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:.5in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.MsoListParagraphCxSpMiddle, li.MsoListParagraphCxSpMiddle, div.MsoListParagraphCxSpMiddle 	{mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:.5in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.MsoListParagraphCxSpLast, li.MsoListParagraphCxSpLast, div.MsoListParagraphCxSpLast 	{mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:.5in; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.Style1, li.Style1, div.Style1 	{mso-style-name:Style1; 	mso-style-parent:"List Paragraph"; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:39.0pt; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	mso-list:l0 level1 lfo1; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.Style1CxSpFirst, li.Style1CxSpFirst, div.Style1CxSpFirst 	{mso-style-name:Style1CxSpFirst; 	mso-style-parent:"List Paragraph"; 	mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:39.0pt; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	mso-list:l0 level1 lfo1; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.Style1CxSpMiddle, li.Style1CxSpMiddle, div.Style1CxSpMiddle 	{mso-style-name:Style1CxSpMiddle; 	mso-style-parent:"List Paragraph"; 	mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:39.0pt; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	mso-list:l0 level1 lfo1; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} p.Style1CxSpLast, li.Style1CxSpLast, div.Style1CxSpLast 	{mso-style-name:Style1CxSpLast; 	mso-style-parent:"List Paragraph"; 	mso-style-type:export-only; 	margin-top:0in; 	margin-right:0in; 	margin-bottom:0in; 	margin-left:39.0pt; 	margin-bottom:.0001pt; 	mso-add-space:auto; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	mso-pagination:widow-orphan; 	mso-list:l0 level1 lfo1; 	font-size:12.0pt; 	font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-fareast-font-family:Cambria; 	mso-fareast-theme-font:minor-latin; 	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman"; 	mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} @page Section1 	{size:8.5in 11.0in; 	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in; 	mso-header-margin:.5in; 	mso-footer-margin:.5in; 	mso-paper-source:0;} div.Section1 	{page:Section1;}  /* List Definitions */ @list l0 	{mso-list-id:2017533234; 	mso-list-type:hybrid; 	mso-list-template-ids:-697529856 201217400 67698691 67698693 67698689 67698691 67698693 67698689 67698691 67698693;} @list l0:level1 	{mso-level-number-format:bullet; 	mso-level-style-link:Style1; 	mso-level-text:&#61623;; 	mso-level-tab-stop:none; 	mso-level-number-position:left; 	margin-left:39.0pt; 	text-indent:-.25in; 	font-family:Symbol;} ol 	{margin-bottom:0in;} ul 	{margin-bottom:0in;} --> Bringing another person--or another person's problems--into a family's dynamics will affect the balance and can create problems.
So it helps to keep asking ourselves "What's the goal?" In both Rodney's situation and the case of the older parent's driver's license, (last Saturday's post) considering these relevant "Key Thoughts" in the sidebar would seem to have been a big help: issues of safety, whether actions and thoughts are in the best interest of the parent or whether they are undertaken to make it easier (or less worrisome) for the adult child whether all possible information was studied before taking action.Can honest discussion, guided by the key thoughts above, help reasonable people reach reasonable conclusions?
While it definitely helps in many situations, the honest response is: "yes," but sometimes "no." Involving an experienced professional (probably a social worker who works with the elderly and their families) can be a great help in resolving conflicts and is an excellent (and probably the least expensive) resource.
Some work privately, others work in counseling services or agencies.
Advantages: * An adult child can be helped to realize and understand the impact the added responsibilities have on her/his family.
* S(he) would have support--wouldn't feel s(he) had to "go it" alone.* S(he) would have professional decision-making help from experts who'd "been there" with previous clients.However, let's face it.
When we are overburdened, it's often hard to think about doing things in any other way, but the way we're doing them.
So involving a social worker to help with aging parent-family issues may be rejected at first, yet it's worth pursuing.
There's a bottom line to consider: the time spent with a professional counselor can save untold hours of stress and yield good results.
A win-win for all.       
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 9, 2010>
Often a topic of conversation when friends who go "way back" get together: "Aging Parents." And so it was at a small dinner party last night.
Many guests had known each other since high school.
And when you think back to people you knew well in high school, you realize in most cases you also knew a lot about their families, even their pets.Last night brought a story from someone who was not part of the high school group.
But many can relate to the story she shared.Her mother had come west to live with this adult daughter (the story teller) and her husband.
The mother, relatively healthy but having minor memory problems, said she wanted to get a driver's license so she'd have an official ID now that she was living in another state.
Her adult daughter's husband was not in favor.
Did not want to encourage his mother-in-law's driving at her advanced age.As often happens, the adult child felt caught in the middle.
She didn't want to deprive her mother, on the one hand.
And on the other, her husband had a point.
But since her mother hadn't shown herself to be a dangerous driver, the daughter gave in and accompanied her mother to the Motor Vehicle Department.Her mother passed the vision test--no problem.
Then advanced from one station to the next--passing without problems.
Then she had her picture taken.
The last part of the procedure was to sign the official form, which was handed to her to sign.
For whatever reason, she was confused about where to sign or how to sign.The Motor Vehicle Department official seemed puzzled and looked at the adult daughter.
Her eyes met his (and perhaps she discretely shook her head).
Whatever.
He got the message.
He explained to the mother that he couldn't give her a driver's license, but he could give her an identification card with her picture on it.
That wasn't a problem, she said.
All she wanted in the first place was an ID with her picture on it.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, January 5, 2010>
Thanks to those of you who told me how gratifying it was to make contact with older friends during the last week.
It's a win-win for everyone, isn't it?Thanks also to those who questioned the solution of the "opinionated" grandmother who kept family peace by basically saying everything the younger generation did was "fine."
The questioning is valid and the grandmother's solution is appropriate and understandable if we go back, reread and digest the November 7th, "What's the Goal?"
post.In that post I related something helpful from my counseling experience: suggesting that parents ask themselves "What's the Goal?"
when dealing with their children's difficult behavior.
It's simple, easy-to-follow guidance that's equally applicable here.
Keeping the goal first and foremost in mind, when facing potentially heated situations, is just plain smart.
It prevents getting sidetracked, prevents exacerbating a situation, and avoids a lot of unpleasantness.If the goal of the self-described "opinionated" grandmother is to maintain good relations and peace in the family, she has made a decision that works well for her.
And this highlights another, perhaps more difficult, aspect: the importance of knowing ourselves and the impact we have on others.
Understanding this is not always easy and sometimes it takes counseling to gain this awareness.
In any event, having this understanding serves us well as we deal with many challenging situations.I want to note here that there may be a time when we need to change goals mid-stream so to speak.
And that would be a time when discussion discloses that there's a threat to life and limb.
While that doesn't happen often, the possibility someone could hurt him or herself or others is serious and would probably necessitate a quick change in goals.Lastly remembering to keep "What's the Goal?"
in mind is as important for the older generation interacting with the younger generation as it is for the younger generation interacting with their aging parents.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, January 2, 2010>
Many traditions disappeared with the last century yet New Year's Resolutions continue.
One teenager thinks today's resolutions are more self-serving (exercising regularly, losing weight) than focusing on others.
Perhaps.
An octogenarian recalls her teenage resolutions like giving up candy didn't last very long.
But she says that her resolution to be nicer to and spend more time with her widowed grandmother who lived with her family sticks in her mind as lasting.When talking about resolutions that involve family as opposed to self, my small sample of older people (from Arizona, Delaware, New York, and Oregon) care deeply about their children and grandchldren and are making--or have made--resolutions to further cement the relationship.For example, resolutions to "let go"--or at the least not pressure--when family situations and values upset an older generation prevail:               "I will try to accept what my grandchildren and children do.
(I must learn to     accept it 'cause there's nothing I can do about it.)"
"I'm going to try and figure out how to take a "stand" that would work and not destroy family relations."
"I speak for myself and other friends--we've just been discussing values.
I'm making a resolution not to get upset by the fact that adult children may be wonderful; but they don't value the same material things we do...old family heirloom things: furniture, a cup collection from my grandmother, my great-grandmother's Christmas tree ornament etc."
Other resolutions involve family in a different way:               "I'm going to tidy up this year.
If I die I'd hate for my kids to come in and have to clean up all the stuff I've accumulated over the years."
"I'm going to make it a point to listen more, to find out more about my far-away-living grandchildren and what they're doing.
I visited at Christmas, listened to their music with them, discussed the lyrics, learned who Taylor Swift is and what's important in their lives.
I even learned about hockey and watched a game.
My grandchild is a star hockey player.
Now we have a commonality to email about and discuss."
"I am going to accept the fact that my far-away living son and family are very busy with their own lives.
While they're at the top of my priority list, I know my husband and I are not at the top of theirs even though we all get along very well.
So if we want to be with them more often than twice a year, we have to make the accommodations."
"I want to maintain my health (I'm 92) so I can be around to see my great-grandchildren develop; and I want to keep working at my business.
"One admittedly "very opinionated" grandmother says "This is a big stretch for me, it's so unlike me not to say anything, but I made a resolution years ago--I have many children and grandchildren--and it has worked to keep our family together.
It goes like this:Whatever they do is fine.Whatever they say is fine.Whatever they want is fine.
"It seems adult children and grandchildren, whether living near or far, live large in their parents' and grandparents' minds, perhaps even beyond what we might expect.
A 92-year-old puts keeping herself in good health because she wants to watch her great-grandchildren "develop," ahead of continuing to run her business.
That says a lot.
Is a New Year's resolution by adult children and grandchildren to make an effort to regularly communicate with and include the older generation in order?
Perhaps it already exists.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 29, 2009>
This barely filled space doesn't signify zero resolutions; rather the resolutions are being amassed to be featured in the January 2, 2010 post.
If you wish to contribute a resolution before January 2nd, send it to the gmail address at the right, letting me know if you are an aging parent or an adult child.
Happy New Year to all.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 26, 2009>
What happens after an event that we've been anticipating--hearing about well in advance--takes place?
No matter the event, it happens (present tense).
Then it's over.
Ended.
Done.
And we are left with the emotional residue--wonderful or not so wonderful, depending.When it's something we've been dreading, it's no doubt an emotional relief to have it over.
When it's something we've looked forward to, and it meets or exceeds our expectations, we may be filled with happiness and wish it could last.
But since it can't, we may feel sad, or it's a "let down.
"The day after Christmas signals such an ending is coming and it's not uncommon for people who enjoy the festivities to have an emotional response.
When aging parents have a busy life the holidays don't necessarily fill a void, rather they are a welcome addition to an already busy schedule.
When parents live alone, however, and don't have a busy life, the void left at the end of the holidays can intensify feelings of emptiness, and of being alone.
And the fact that winter weather sets in and it gets dark earlier isn't helpful in certain parts of the US.Can adult children inflate that let down feeling?
Yes.
First, refer to this past Tuesday's post and reread the three suggestions.
Next, use your 2010 calendar to ensure the three suggestions aren't forgotten.I am remembering the advice given to me by a priest interviewed for my divorce book years ago.
He talked about the importance of touching base on a regular basis with people we care about when they face challenges or need us in their lives.
To this end, he said, he wrote on his calendar at regular intervals--daily, twice weekly, weekly, monthly etc.
etc.--"phone so-and-so," putting their telephone numbers next to their names.
He said it was the only way he could be certain of regularly continuing the connection.
That advice turned out to be helpful for me at certain times with my counselees and their parents.
It's rarely lack of interest that prevents us from doing something additional on a regular basis.
More likely we just get busy and forget.So once again I guess we need to be thinking about picking up the phone--after we take out our 2010 calendar or whatever date-book technology we use and write in a few names and numbers of our older, living alone friends and possibly even our parents.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 22, 2009>
The words and melody from the radio fill my car as I drive to the post office to mail the holiday cards.
We have snow.
It looks like a winter wonderland.
And kids, amid shrieks of laughter and merriment, are sledding down our shared driveway on anything they can find that's large enough to sit on.
Sun is shining, snow balls are flying, and I'm certain school vacation is adding to this happiest of times.
Then my counseling background kicks in and I remember that holidays aren't always the happiest of times for people.
So I decide to check in with a few older people and see how they're doing.
(I'm a counselor, trained to ask objective questions.)
My findings: The consensus, from my small sample--but there's no disagreement: This is the haa, haa-py-est time of the year for children who have none of the responsibilities of adulthood, for newly marrieds who are looking forward, and for young couples with children who still believe in Santa.
It's an especially happy time when older family members are geographically near enough to children and grandchildren so that they can gather together to celebrate and talk about shared past experiences.
Meanwhile the excitement of the children in the family provides a background of energy and optimism.
"The holidays are a time when our mind drifts back to past Christmases that were happy times.
It's a sentimental time," recalls one older widow.
"It's a wonderful time when families can get together, yet a lot of people are completely alone.
As people get older, they have experienced losses.
Especially for those who've lost their mates, other people's happiness can be a reminder of the losses we've incurred.
We're just more vulnerable to that kind of thing when we get older."
"Unless there's a lot of family around and a lot going on, it's not the happiest time of the year.
It's depressing," shares a 70-year-old man.
There's agreement that it takes effort for older people to find this a happy time.
"It doesn't just happen," says one.
"It's what you make of it when you're older," says another.
"If you make the effort to be with people it's good, but it can be exhausting.
We may continue to decorate and continue to write notes on the Christmas cards because we want our home to look festive and we like to get letters back after we write the notes.
But we need to trim down and trim back so we aren't too tired to enjoy."
So then I ask the question: How can younger people help?
Can they help?
The answers:1.
Keep in close contact with elders--aunts, uncles.
Make sure they're not forgotten.2.
A phone call even; it doesn't have to be a visit.
I had a wonderful phone call from a far-away relative recently.
You know older people don't relate to an email as they do to a phone call.3.
It's nice to take older people out to something, but take them to something that is rather quiet, that isn't too taxing an experience.
* * * * *OK, everyone.
Why not pick up the phone and talk with at least one older person who lives alone or feels isolated.
Brighten his or her day.
Make these older people feel special, cared about...because they are.
Raise their self-esteem.
Add interest to their lives.
Major studies confirm that connections are one of the most important factors in successful aging.
It may not be the Haa, Haa-py-est time of the year for most older people, but we can make it better.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, December 17, 2009>
This situation may not be all that uncommon, although I hope I'm wrong.
It involves a retired, respected professional in the health care field and his independence; and his capable, caring adult daughter with an extraordinarily busy life.
And stuff that can happen, but shouldn't.Rodney, divorced, and in his early 80's, was living happily by himself in a condo in a very nice southern California suburb.
Because of his profession he had many friends who valued his wisdom and kind ways.
But he was increasingly seeming "spacey,"-- "dementia-like" to those who knew him well.
He appeared unsteady on his feet at times.
Close friends obviously noticed this and may have attributed it to his age.
(We've discussed how people hesitate to "rock the boat" in a previous post.)
So the reasons for no one questioning this physical and mental change could be many.One day Rodney took a bad fall in his apartment.
A neighbor heard his call for help and phoned 911.
At the local hospital where supposedly they did a full evaluation to determine the cause of his fall, his daughter was told he needed assisted living.
She quickly and efficiently made arrangements for assisted living, but it was soon evident that Rodney needed even more help so a private aide was hired to be with him.
More falls, more trips in and out of the hospital.
No one understood the cause, only the effect as Rodney became more and more frustrated and, at times, unruly.Assisted living could not provide the care Rodney required.
So his daughter located a group home with adequate staff to watch him and prevent more falls.
The superviser of the home, a thorough person, had a hunch... that medication could be causing Rodney's problems.
It then surfaced that Rodney (who could legally write prescriptions), had prescribed a medication commonly used to aid sleep for himself.
Rodney had no primary care doctor (unrelated specialists treated him).
And evidently prior to the "hunch" no one was aware Rodney was taking this medication and that it could produce the side effects Rodney was experiencing.The good news: the group home's superviser put Rodney on a new medication.
He's himself again; he's much steadier on his feet.
The bad news: he has nothing in common with the residents at this group home.
He doesn't like living there.
But during these many months his efficient daughter quickly sold his condo because, she was told, he could no longer live alone and because funds were--and would be--needed for his care.
Rodney has no condo to return to.Initially his daughter was glad to see him cared for, didn't wanted another upheaval, and thought she would have peace of mind.
But with new medication, Rodney made it clear he had no reason to stay in the group home.A bad start, lack of information, incomplete knowledge, inaccurate assumptions, and a busy, caring daughter's well-meaning quick fixes.
Upon rereading this story, it makes sense that people, who have--or have given--power of attorney and/or health care proxy responsibility, reread and share the "Key Thoughts" (see sidebar at right).
In addition: 1.
It would make sense for adult children to have a current list of parents' medications.2.
Getting help from an experienced geriatric social worker would most likely have reduced stress on the busy daughter and led to well-thought-out changes with a quicker, better outcome.
* * * * * Oh yes, Rodney did move from the group home, but much time had passed and other problems arose, so he moved to an assisted living facility.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 15, 2009>
Why is it many of us think we can do more than is possible in a given amount of time?
Do our internal clocks run faster than those of most aging people?
Or are older people just more realistic than we are?...and/or better at judging time due to more years of experience?Yes, this is my way of explaining that my holiday-card-sending is still in progress.
But I want to take a minute to talk about the fact that so many adult children feel there is too much to do and too little time to do it in.
A friend has aptly named this phenomena "compressed time."
I don't think I speak only for myself and my friend when I say many of us are slaves to this phenomena.This may be one of the reasons younger people can seem rude to older people, whose metabolisms probably run at a slower pace.
In this coming Saturday's blog I am going to discuss a sad, but true story, reported by someone I've known for decades.
It may have been driven by caring adult children's feeling of "compressed time."
You can judge for yourself.
In any event, it's an instructive story that will be a gift to two generations if it saves any other caring adult children and their adult parents from such a situation.I could not find a place for the story in my book.
But it needs to be publicized.
The consequences of not knowing this story are too great, in my opinion.
So, until Saturday when all of my cards will be in the mail, think about "compressed time" and feel free to share your thoughts for this blog.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 12, 2009>
Chanukah began last night, when the first candle was lit.
Christmas is 13 days away.
Getting the Christmas cards out is now at the top my "things to do" list.
This post will be very short, since I have yet to begin the job of writing little notes on the cards, then signing, addressing, and adding the stamps to them.I don't know why I feel compelled to write a note on each card.
Possibly because we live on the other side of the country from where we were born and have many friends and much family in the West, so it's a time to catch up.
But I don't send the first cards to the people who live the farthest away.
I send the first cards to the oldest people on my list.
Edie tops my list this year.
She is either 98 or 99.
I'm going to phone her tomorrow to have a little chat and I will confirm her age.
She's a petite, very wise woman who is always perfectly put together and is often quoted in my book.
I understand from others that her daughters give her hairdresser appointments for the entire year (that's a great gift, they set up a charge at the beauty shop), which is certainly one the of the reasons Edie always looks immaculate.So I'm off to begin the cards and plan to finish before Tuesday's post.
If I run into problems, I'll let you know.      
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 8, 2009>
I visited a sick friend in a nursing home last week.
Every nook and cranny greeted me with colorful holiday decorations, creating such a spirited atmosphere that I almost forgot where I was.
The theme was Christmas (with a smidge of Chanukah).
Clearly much time, thought, and energy went into decorating this nursing home.
I thought about how uplifting it was to be surrounded by a holiday atmosphere and how much I loved it as a child.It reinforced the reason, throughout my growing up years and even now, with no children present in the house, we decorate for holidays.
Why?
Tradition no doubt, but I think it goes deeper.
Going through the ritual lets us indulge ourselves as we think about times past; and with the tradition and creativity that go into transforming our homes for the holidays comes a special feeling of warmth and joy.Eloise and Earl, who died in their 90's, had to be the masters of this art.
(You haven't met them yet but they figure prominently in my book.)
Their tree decorations were unique, and chronicled their life and their friends.
No surprise that their tree was featured in House Beautiful and provided a photo op and text for a NY Times article some years later.
Its ornaments-- a nut cup from their wedding, an eyelash curler from some still-secret event in their lives--along with hundreds of items from friends and from their travels to almost every place in the world, conjured up countless memories.
These older people had inordinate energy; and while I think many older people would love to have this kind of energy and decorate every year, most don't.Yet well into their 80's, Eloise and Earl made a decision.
Climbing to the highest step on the ladder and stretching out over the staircase railing to put the honored piece on the top of the tree needed to be done by someone younger.
The tree, over a story tall (and positioned in an area where the staircase curved up to the second floor) required stretching and reaching from the balcony to the branches for the finishing touches.
My husband inherited this job, wobbling on the ladder, finally putting the ornament perfectly in place when Eloise would teasingly say "Could you move it about half an inch to the right (or left).
"Back to the present I wondered: would offering to help with holiday decorations bring additional joy to aging parents as it did to Eloise and Earl?
Does it make sense to renew everyone's curiosity in that old box of ornaments (it's probably stored somewhere) so we can share a special experience with parents or other older people in our lives?
If the old box no longer exists, do we start our own tradition and purchase some decorative items?
Older and younger people engaged in a project together is empowering and generates a sharing of ideas and memories we might otherwise never know about.My parents are no longer alive.
But I'm thinking of someone to whom I may offer my help.
I love to decorate.
So my offer may turn out to be a more meaningful gift for my older friend than any I've listed in the previous two posts...except for the wide rubber band jar opener, that is!
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, December 5, 2009>
Making distinctions between gift suggestions in categories 1 and 2 has been more difficult than I imagined.
The good news: most gifts in Category One seem helpful to all older people.
Some additonal Category One suggestions are below.
Category Two gifts follow.Gifts that lift the spirit Amaryllis plant: Easy care.
Flowers are showy, beautiful and reflect the holdiay season.
The plants, from which the flower stalk has already started growing, are in flower shops, gardening centers, and grocery stores (Trader Joes has a nice supply in my area).
It takes a week or two for the buds to open, depending how far along they are.
Bright light helps them open faster.
Blooms last about a week in an enviornment that is not too warm and where the soil is kept damp, but not soggy.
Check with a salesperson and purchase ones now whose buds aren't yet open if you want them to look beautiful for Christmas.
Watching nature unford is uplifing.Snuggie: from my then 9-year-old niece, Lilli, who requested one of these fleese, blanket-like, sleeve added "garmets" for Christmas last year, to older people who want to wrap up in a warm, comfy way in a chair or on the sofa, this is a welcome, fairly inexpensive gift.
Google "snuggie".
there are some money saving offers during the holiday season.Specialty magazines.
According to my unofficial advisors (I susbscribe to none of these) check out: Art and Antiques, Bon Appetit, Kiplinger's Personal Finance (http://www.kiplinger.com/), National Geographic, Sports Illustrated, Travel and Leisure.
While I don't subscribe, I like Harper's Bazaar (http://www.harpersbazaar.com/) with its "Fabulous at Every Age" section.
Don't we love getting mail that isn't junk?Latest photos of the family, children and grandchildren.Anything made by a grandchild.CATEGORY TWOGifts that lift the spirit continues.
Our Category Two gift recipients drive or have easy access to purchase what they need.Memberships.
Depending on parents' interests, memberships to: botanical gardens, museums (art, natural history etc.
), historical societies, zoos, libraries, woman's clubs, etc.
Many offer exhibits and members' meetings and most offer lectures and send timely, informative magazines.
In New York City, for example, the 92nd Street Y offers a wide variety timely, stimulating programs--lectures, concerts, classes.
In many of today's libraries card holders can check out everything from DVDs and movies to books formatted for the Kindle.Tickets for parents to attend or take a friend or go with you to a concert, performance, sporting event, the theatre, dog show, boat show, auto show, flower show etc.Invitation to go on a trip with you--a short trip to a nearby beach or lake (if you live near water) or the mountains or a more involved trip (cruise, group tour).
For far-away-living children, taking care of arrangements for parents to come for a visit is usually a very precious and welcome gift.Subscribe to a premium channel for your parents' TV (eg.
HBO, Showtime, a sports channel).
* * * * *Lastly, my gift for you or anyone whose grip has become weaker with age.
A suggestion for a jar-opener that costs nothing-- a somewhat wide rubber band that you stretch around the lid of a jar.
It grips the lid making it easy to turn and thus easy to open.
Somewhat wide rubber bands are found on produce (like celery) in grocery stores that don't use twist-ties for that purpose.
Rubber gloves may also accomplish this, but they're bulkier and cost money.
Happy shopping!
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, December 1, 2009>
The day after Thanksgiving signals the official start of the holiday shopping season.
Time to think about gifts.
According to my aging advisors, the gifts below will please older people.
Why?
Because they reinforce independence while adding pleasure.For organization's sake, they're in two categories:Category one, today's post.
Gift suggerstions for chronologically old, independent-living people.
who may or may not be young at heart.
Most of these gifts are practical and make life easier.
Some are fun, add excitement and could be considered a luxury.
Having most of them will, according to R (age 96)--"SAVE."
She says they're "a time saver, an energy saver, and a money saver" because they save old people, who are more frail and don't get out as readily or easily from having to go out and buy them.Category two will be Saturday's post.
Gift suggestions for chronologically younger, independent-living older people who may or may not drive, but easily get out more often.
They can include gifts from category one, but additional gifts join this list.
Many gifts are not exclusive to one category, indeed some may work for everyone on your list.CATEGORY ONE:Practical, time saving, great to have on hand Postage stampsMailer envelopes with "bubble" liningSmall note paper (for writing short notes, when long letters are unnecessary)Selection of greeting cards (eg.
birthday, sympathy)Attractive note padsWrapping paper and ribbon (for holiday, birthday gifts etc.
).Nice soaps, small guest soaps--bars or liquidPen supply (know favorites kinds--fine point, felt tip etc.
)Good to have when neededA good blood pressure monitor (if appropriate)Nice pill box (a small one or the 7-day kind)Magnifying mirrorSmall magnifying glasses (for different reading areas)Good, sturdy step stool with something strong to hold onto.
We know falls are major health hazards and we may not be told about them.
(Oct. 31 post) (Check Williams- Sonoma catalog)Small alarm clock, that glows in the dark, for nightstand.A good nail file (nails become more fragile with age).
Check the double-sided crystal nail files http://www.supportplus.com/Moisturizing creams and lotionsFavorite snack foodsStylish dressing with ease.
Criteria: does it slip on easily; is it attractive?The challenge: finding clothing for the older person who takes pride in his/her looks--or for others who should take more pride in how they look.
Mostly worn in the house, but still appropriate if unexpected guests arrive or if going to the mail box.
Requirements: easy to put on--no difficult or small buttons--or hooks--in hard to reach places, no unreliable zippers.Good-looking easy-to-slip-into slippers or sandals (non-skid soles)Zip-front hostess coat, duster, caftan that doesn't look bed-roomy.
Check: http://www.carolwrightgifts.com/, the Carol Wright Catalog, or local stores.
Older people often prefer models with two big pockets (eg.
for Kleenex).Sweaters, sweater vests, shawls, shrugs (provide warmth; enhance wardrobe)A gift certificate for a dressmaker or tailor to do alterations (possibly come to the house) so favorite clothes fit well.Gifts that lift the spirit Lottery ticketsA written invitation to take parent(s) or older friend for light (errand) shopping.A written invitation to take parent(s)/or older friend for lunch, movie, sporting event etc.Food basketsAttractive night lightTaxi scriptNew towels and washcloths, not too heavy and luxurious, so they dry out easily; don't smell stale.
One old-timer says the "Bar Mop Dish Cloth" at Williams-Sonoma is "soft and light weight--great for washing your face." http://www.williams-sonoma.com/* * * *Saturday's post will feature Category Two gift suggestions.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 28, 2009>
Sixteen family members and friends reconnected to celebrate Thanksgiving on Thursday.
Five new guests; five newly-created place card leaves.
And Ruth's place card leaf took its new place as part of the centerpiece.
(Nov. 21 post.
)R at 96 and her best friend (86) were the oldest.
Three of the younger guests were new to our Thanksgiving tradition.
They included a new boyfriend, one of Ruth's granddaughters, and the youngest son of R's neighbors.
His mother was at R's birthday luncheon saying after her mother died, she turned to R for understanding and wisdom.
(Oct. 13 post.
)This Thanksgiving over 25% of our guests were newcomers, and while there were many connections, some had never met our family nucleus before.
Sixteen people, their ages ranging from 22-96, represented 8 decades.
And R, who seems to remember almost everything, says it's the best Thanksgiving she can remember.
Her back-up comment: "No one in the family even thought of turning on the TV."It was like an intergenerational magnet .The wisdom of the older, the accomplishments and activities of the younger, and the energy, optimism, and moving forward spirit of the youngest pulled everyone together.
*                                  *                                  *                                   *                               *Tuesday's post will feature holiday gift possibilities, given the season has begun.
Anyone heard of crystal nail files?
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 24, 2009>
Wishing you a very happy Thanksgiving.
I'm on vacation with friends and family and cooking Thanksgiving dinner for 16 people!
Next post is next Saturday.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 21, 2009>
Thursday is Thanksgiving.
My favorite holiday.
For me it's a warm, inclusive, happy yet somewhat poignant celebration of our good fortune in this country and we remember also that many are not as fortunate as we.
My husband has begun the meal, since we've had men and women fighting overseas, with a short prayer for their safe return, expressing our gratitude for their sacrifices.While I have always prepared the majority of the meal, I have made a special point of encouraging older people to participate in the preparations.
My father, alternated with Harry (when both were in their 80's and early 90's), stringing a cranberry necklace for the turkey--something I'd seen on the now deceased Gourmet Magazine cover many years ago.
If I couldn't cook the elaborate turkey, I could at least make--or have Dad or Harry make--it look elaborate.Mother, in her 80's, made her special pumpkin chiffon pie, but bought, instead of making, the dough as her fingers became more arthritic.
And R., who celebrated her 96th birthday in September (see October post), fixed the stuffing and helped me make Harry's wife Mary's yams, after Mary died in her early 90's.And so traditions begin and are continued.
For almost 20 years, since I saw part of an early morning Martha Stewart prepare-for-Thanksgiving show before going to work, I have made place cards on autumn leaves, guests' names written with a special white ink pen.
During these years guests have brought boyfriends, girlfriends, and fiances; and have divorced, broken engagements and died.
We have disposed of all but the latter's place card leaves, which are placed name side down, along with other autumn leaves, around the centerpiece.Ruth's leaf will be a new addition to the name side down group this year.
I think she was 93 when she died.
It wasn't easy for her daughter--and later grand-daughters--to pick her up from her assisted living apartment almost an hour away.
But she looked forward to coming for Thanksgiving.
And as long as she wanted to come, her grandchildren made the effort to bring her and take her home.
And as she grew more frail each year and had sight only in one eye, she continued to create for me a Thanksgiving card of appreciation.When something means a lot to an older person, but entails going out of our way and even sustaining an underlying worry that some emergency type health issue could interrupt everything, our knee-jerk reaction may be that we don't want to make the effort (which is probably very little effort compared to the effort an old person must make).
But when we do, and see the priceless joy we've made possible, how could we not make that extra effort.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 17, 2009>
Friends were shocked when a very independent, accomplished 80-year-old widow sold her home and moved to dramatically smaller quarters in an independent living complex.
Before, during, and after her husband's death, her days were filled with activities; but from almost the moment he died she told everyone she "dreaded" eating alone and being alone at night.
Preparing and eating healthy meals can be a big hurdle for people living alone.
While older couples can enjoy each other's company at meal time, the thought of eating alone is painful for some older widowed people, and dreaded by others.
Still others cook and eat alone, although transportation to grocery stores can be a problem.
In such instances, adult children can schedule a time (or two) each week to take parents grocery shopping (or hire someone to do this).
Also thoughtful still-driving neighbors can offer rides.
Some older people make plans to share a taxi when they go shopping.
One widowed mother, on a fixed income (as are many), goes to the market with someone twice a week.
Never-the-less her daughter buys extra groceries on sale (3 for $2.00) to share with her mother who likes to cook.
It enables her mother to have items she might not want to afford otherwise, while making reimbursement by a proud parent, who doesn't want to accept "charity," insignificant or unnecessary.
Dignity upheld.
This same daughter not only brings groceries during her weekly visits, but cooks with her mother, when time allows.
She and her mother enjoy doing something real together, making/baking then freezing some in small portions to ensure delicious food at another time.
A famous writer said she wanted to participate in life-- didn't want to be a "passenger in life."
Doesn't cooking make one a participant?
Question: How can adult children enhance parent's nutrition?
Suggestions:Give a "Fruit of the Month" gift for special occasions (wwwHarry and David).
Bring cheese and crackers and/or fruit, instead of candy and cookies, when visiting any older person.
Bring sugar-free drinks and treats for those on sugar-restricted diets.
Bring flavored bottled water which can incent even non-water drinkers to drink (especially important for older people who don't experience thirst as much and can easily become dehydrated).
Nutritious snacks like peanut butter filled pretzels with or without salt are available at Trader Joe's, as are "blister peanuts."
Meals on Wheels supplies a complete, nutritious hot meal daily.
Fine for aging parents who don't require gourmet-type food.
Isn't ensuring--to the best of our ability--that parents have nutritious food an important priority.
</doc>
<doc date=Friday, November 13, 2009>
I've been visiting the place I was born, sleeping in my old room, reconnecting with people I've known.
No time to write a post on Saturday.
Next post Tuesday.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 10, 2009>
The NY Yankees won the 2009 World Series last week.
What a way to inaugurate the New Yankee Stadium!
Jubilation reigned in the ballpark.
But George Steinbrenner, the Yankees owner, did not attend the game.
Millions watched as his son, Yankees' managing partner Hal Steinbrenner, accepted the magnificent World Series Trophy, crafted by Tiffany & Company.Mr.
Steinbrenner, now 79, was home watching the game on TV, we are told.
For over three decades he invested so much of himself--financially and emotionally--in his Yankee team.
Since money is no problem and he must have had all the resources to make it easy for him to attend the game--limo, luxurious box, capable caregivers--we can only guess as to why he stayed home.
But that's not the our primary concern.
What was this victorious moment like for his sons, Hal and Hank?
I thought about the importance we place on having our parents with us to celebrate important events.These thoughts followed: Why is it so important?
Are our wishes for our parents always compatible with their wishes and needs?
Do we want things for our parents that we assume will be good for them, not realizing it may have the opposite effect?
I was discussing these questions with a friend, who shared the following true story with me.
It was one of those eye-opening moments:The wife of a prominent community leader who was in the middle stages of Alzheimer's, wanted him to accompany her to an important social event.
She thought that it would be good for him to get out, he would have many friends at the event, and she wanted him to participate in life.
You can imagine her surprise when she found him sitting in the bedroom crying.
"Why?"
you ask.
Because he was having a lucid enough moment to realize that he wouldn't recognize people he should recognize and he didn't want to embarrass himself and end up feeling foolish.My friend said she could relate to this situation because of her mother, who has macular degeneration.
A still bright and intelligent woman in her early 90's, she stopped going out socially because of the difficulty she had recognizing people she knew.
And it was hard to see food on a plate or in a bowl so she no longer wanted to eat out.
While she had pride, she greatly appreciated it when friends came up and said something like "Hello A.
It's me--Sally," saving her from embarrassing moments.
But that didn't happen often enough even though her friends knew about her vision problem.Which brings us back to the reality that there are important occasions our parents just can't be there to share with us, even though they'd like to and we'd like them to.
And while we may feel bad, it doesn't change anything, so probably everyone feels better if we find ways to make the best of it.
I think the Steinbrenners--young and old-- set a good example. 
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, November 7, 2009>
Over the many years I counseled, this question provided simple, but very good guidance for parents dealing with difficult teenagers.
I've found it's equally helpful with parents.
(Indeed, to be honest, I've found it's helpful in dealing with almost any situation.
)"Empowering Parents" and 'Keeping Them Safe" (preventing threat to life and limb) are goals and as such are repetitive themes in this blog.
As I was reading Tuesday's post, it was perfectly clear that parents have pride, fear losing independence, and resent being lectured to.
It was also clear that adult children may live with a constantly unsettled feeling that can rise to "crazed" unless we have the tools to give us confidence.So this brings us to our goals for ourselves.
And this is where the advice given on the airplane ("First place the [oxygen] mask over your nose and mouth and then assist others) comes in.
Many have said we become "parents to our parents." That clearly isn't empowering.
Indeed it puts additional responsibilities on us and creates additional stress for us, assuming parents are still competent.
If they're not, of course, we must step in and that is the time we, legitimately in my opinion, may become parents our parents.Until then, towards our goal of empowering, we have opportunities to uphold and support parents' pride...in their ability to handle things, in their wisdom, in their appearance, in their accomplishments.
We can no doubt add to the list.
When parents get old and especially when they live alone, pride may be one of the few things they have left.
Indeed the compliments that are so much a part of normal every day life may be hard to come by.
Supporting parental pride when legitimate, (they'll know if we're faking!
), contributes to self-esteem and makes people feel good.
Obviously when parents feel good about themselves, we, as caring children, feel good and isn't that a good goal for ourselves! 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, November 3, 2009>
It's hard to know when our parents' emergency events will occur.
One thing I do know--on a few hours notice I was able to fly from Milan, Italy to the West Coast in the same day.I knew my mother was having medical issues as I left for a vacation in Italy.
Indeed I had reservations about going so far away.
On the other hand, when we have older parents we never know when an event will happen and rationally I knew it didn't make sense to put life on hold awaiting such an event.
So we followed through with our plans to go to Italy with friends.Some years earlier I had attended a program about aging parents.
It included a clip from a film or TV show featuring an adult child whose life literally revolved around her parents and her concerns about their health issues.
She was so consumed with apprehension every time the phone rang, that it seemed plausible that she would make herself sick and that her husband would book a one-way flight to a far-away place!
While the film clip seemed exaggerated and somewhat ridiculous, I didn't forget it.
For this trip I planned ahead, leaving my itinerary and contact information along with instructions about doctors and doctors' appointments for everyone who might need them.Night #1--Milan:  the phone call came.
Everyone but Mother had gone out for a birthday dinner.
Mother had recently come out of the hospital and remained home with a caregiver; but she needed oxygen.
Her doctor wouldn't order oxygen and simply put, the caregiver (who couldn't reach the family) worried Mother would die, and decided to phone me in Italy.
Needless to say, I made immediate plans to return to the US.Fortunately I had a Plan A--someone to meet me at the airport should I ever need to make the quick trip back.
And that part of the plan went like clockwork.
I should say, as a far-away-living daughter, many years before I had spoken with my brother about his flexibility should I need to fly back on the spur of the moment.
I also discussed this possibility with a very good friend so I'd have a back-up if my brother wasn't available.When I got to the house my limp, semi-asleep mother could barely keep her eyes open, and was in no condition to appreciate the new sweater I managed to buy in Italy or anything for that matter.
But I knew she was glad I was there.
With a list of Mother's doctors and an updated list of her medications always in my wallet, I was ready to communicate intelligently with her doctors.
Turned out medication-- too much and some unnecessary--caused the problem.
So simple, yet so emotionally and physically draining for everyone involved.What did I learn?
Planning ahead for emergency situations makes so much sense.
When stress is high it's comforting to know we don't have to worry about certain things and we do have some control over others.
When coming a distance, having someone who cares and shares our concerns meet us at an airport is welcoming and supportive.
And keeping essential information in a wallet makes communication with professionals more effective.
I also learned we have good friends who we had to suddenly abandon in Italy  They survived and so has our friendship.      
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 31, 2009>
(Because of responses to Tuesday's post, this replaces the planned "Food" post.)
The following situations and reactions are truly not exclusive to older people.
We'd probably react the same way; but when older people are involved it's different, or does it just seem different?
OK.
Most parents won't tell us----They've fallen.
Reason #1 for a remarkable 88-year-old mother: PRIDE.
By the time her daughter found out, her mother had fallen many times and bounced back to normal without anyone's knowing; or if they knew, they'd been sworn to secrecy.
This time she broke her 88-year-old hip.
It turns out a simple corrective device, placed in her shoes, was all that was needed to solve the balance problem that caused the fall in the first place.
But the solution came after enduring hospitalization and rehabilitation for her hip.
While she's still a spunky and amazing 88-year-old, it did "take her down a notch."Reason #2: for more older parents than we realize: FEAR--of being forced to give up their home and go to a place where their adult children think falls are less likely--be it moving from a home with stairs to a one-floor apartment or to independent or assisted living, or coming to live with their adult children (granted, much less likely today than it was in previous generations) --They've had a driving incident.
Reason: older parents FEAR they'll have to stop driving.
This fear is very prevalent.
But it but needn't be if adult children are smart like Kim (Archives: Driving Part 1); rule out medical issues that prevent people's driving; and know about resources that enable older people to drive well longer (Archives: Driving Part 2).
If it's determined that parents are no longer qualified to drive, it will be based on solid evidence.
On the other hand, it makes everyone's life easier and happier if safe-driving parents continue to drive (possibly aided by programs like CarFit, http://www.car-fit.org/), as long as it remains legitimate for them to do so.--Their problems and concerns.
Reason #1: THEY STILL FEEL PROTECTIVE TOWARDS THEIR CHILDREN and don't want to burden them, especially if the adult children are dealing with problems of their own.Reason #2: They DON'T WANT TO BE TOLD WHAT TO DO, they just want someone to listen and someone who they know cares, to bounce ideas off of.And to a lesser degree, depending on their children's way of responding-----What they're doing.
Reason: NO ONE WANTS A LECTURE or being told what to do, be they children, young adults or old adults.
One independent-living, 80-something-year old father said: "I told my daughter I was going to the movie with a friend and immediately was told it wasn't wise because of swine flu.
Come on.
Children and people with certain conditions and are most at risk and I'm neither." Another 80-year-old sums up the feelings of many when she confidently says "I still think I can make my own decisions."Basically, it seems when parents have reached a certain age and consider themselves independent and able to make good decisions, some may be protective of their adult children and most--if not all--resent unsolicited, even if well-meaning, advice for the reasons above.
There is a little poem in my yet-to-be published book that goes something like this:Our children have knowledge of important thingsThings that they think we should knowForgetting we told them those very same thingsWhen they were young-- years ago.Something to think about.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 27, 2009>
The family wedding in Dallas included at least one 90-year-old.
A psychiatrist, still with a part-time practice, she looked splendid at the wedding in a red dress and flattering make-up!
And she didn't hesitate to dance and was still dancing when I left!
It was heartening for all and reinforces my belief that empowering older people results in remarkable senior citizens.I'm feeling a bit like Julie in the "Julie and Julia" movie (I don't know how many people are reading my blog), so I want to use today's post to do a quick check.
Would you click "Follow" (above HELP!)
at the top of this blog or http://helpagingparents@gmail.com/ (which is also the e-mail address near the bottom of the right sidebar [column]) and let me know you're reading this blog.
You can give your name--or not.
And if you want to tell me about your older parents, or you are an older parent, or have questions or ideas you'd like discussed-- about relatively healthy, independent older parents-- do include them in the e-mail.Until Saturday, then, when I think I want to talk about food.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, October 25, 2009>
Three Sundays ago an allegedly drunk mother left a party in New York City with seven young girls in her car--to take them to a slumber party.
According to the New York media, people were very concerned about her driving.
One person unsuccessfully tried to prevent her from getting into the car, but no one stopped her.
Her car sped out of control and crashed.
An 11-year-old girl was killed; others were hospitalized.
A radio news report a day or two later, said that the mother had regained consciousness, was distraught, and was under suicide watch.Questions: under what circumstances should we force people to do--or not do--something for their own good?
What are the consequences of doing nothing in potentially life-and-limb-threatening situations--because we think nothing will happen?
And when do we act too quickly and change people's lives unnecessarily and not for their own good?There's no question, we must intervene in situations that threaten life and limb.
That's easy to say, but may be difficult to do.
And I know, from a school counselor's viewpoint, it takes discipline--not easy when we know someone well.
As a counselor there is no choice, however.
Child abuse and potential suicide, among others issues, require immediate intervention, just as certain issues with parents require immediate intervention.Denial, an emotional mechanism that operates without our being aware of it, can keep us from acting.
(Remember denial protects us from having to deal with a reality until we're ready to deal with it.)
Could that be the excuse for the people at the party?
Can that be an excuse when older parents are clearly a danger to themselves and/or others and no one intervenes?
Should we do a reality check with our parent's doctor or a trusted friend, who knows our parents, to rule out our possible denial in questionable situations?
It seems that would serve everyone well.Knee-jerk reactions, on the other hand, cause us to make major changes quickly, possibly unnecessarily.
So how do we determine necessary from knee-jerk?A highly respected head of elderly services at a family counseling agency tells us, for example, that adult children are quick to rush their parents into assisted living when they see, for instance, "food rotting in the refrigerator, mail piling up, and the home or apartment a mess." But, she says, "these parents most likely need 'care management, not assisted living' and could probably remain in their home for quite a while (by getting help from a social worker or someone experienced in working with the elderly).In one case new prescription glasses were the answer.
A home aide hired to clean up a few hours a week, solved another problem.
Forgetfulness was caused by easily changed medication, not dementia.
Bottom line: if it isn't immediately dangerous, make haste slowly.While we can't be perfect, it seems we can save ourselves and our parents unnecessary problems and unhappiness if we keep the above in mind.
And these websites may help:http://mayoclinic.org/, http://www.helpguide.org/, http://www.familydoctor.org/ (American Academy of Family Physicians, click 'seniors'), http://forms.lighthouse.org/hny/searchwww.afb.org/seniorsite, (American Foundation for the Blind), http://www.alz.org/ (Alzheimer's Assn)
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 20, 2009>
This weekend is a family wedding.
Grandfathers have passed away, but grandmothers on the groom's side will be flying to Texas for the occasion.
I haven't met the bride or her family so I have no idea of the generations that will be represented on her side.
One thing I do know, weddings are almost always intergenerational events, giving old and young the opportunity to interact easily, sharing a common, celebratory feeling during that brief period of time.I'm reminded once again of Katy's mother, who we met in the last post.
But this time she had a diminishing experience, that even Katy couldn't have predicted, when she attended a bridal shower for her granddaughter several years ago.
Katy's mother was 86 at the time, without wheel chair and a bit younger than she was in the last post.
After the shower as they were driving home she reported to Katy (who sat no where near her mother at the shower) that a "young girl" (actually an adult in her early twenties) came over, introduced herself, sat down, and they had "a really nice conversation" until the end when the "girl" was getting ready to leave and said: "I really enjoyed talking with you, Gran."Katy's mother was incensed at being called "Gran" (a name even her grandchildren didn't use).
No amount of explaining or rationalizing that this was probably the endearing term the "girl" used with her own grandmother, could erase the negative effect of a young woman's well-intentioned conversation with the bride-to-be's grandmother, who considered herself a capable, normal woman--not an old lady.It's hard to get into the head of older people, but older people have shared with me so that a wider audience can understand certain ways of thinking.
For most, the importance of being respected and not considered "old" top of the list (along with independence, decent health and good friends).
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, October 15, 2009>
A good friend's mother died last year at 104.
A proud, strong woman with pride and standards, she became less easy to get along with and more set in her ways as she aged.
She was fiercely loyal and I loved her.
However, there was a fine line that no one should cross if they wanted a relationship with-- and/or cooperation from--her.
That was the line that diminished dignity.
She remained independent in her own apartment with part-time help, until she was 102 and her unsteadiness led to falls.
So it was a choice: caregivers in her apartment or a care facility of some kind.
While she chose caregivers, she balked at having them.
They, of course, didn't dare call her honey or sweetie or dear, but then they couldn't call her "chief or boss" either (POST 1).
So they addressed her by her formal name: they called her Mrs. Miller.
That suited her just fine.Her trips to emergency increased with her age and age-related issues.
Her son was at-the-ready, leaving instructions at nursing stations and the like saying "She wants to be called Mrs. Miller," after he informed appropriate people individually.
If there was to be cooperation, Mrs Miller needed to be treated with--and know she had--respect.I think about the many alert, mentally capable elderly people whose lives are untentionally diminished by people who assume if you're old, you can't be treated like a normal functioning human being.
It's not ill-spirited.
Is it thoughtless or a response to a stereotyped idea of older people?
We could say it's not politically correct.
But most likely many would not listen because old people won't have a loud enough political lobbying voice to be heard on this subject until baby boomers age a bit more.
Yet calling older people well-meaning, but diminishing, names is just one example.
I think about Katy's mother who, in her late-80's, needed a wheel chair when there was a lot of walking involved.
She was a smart and with-it woman, but Katy noticed that if they were going shopping, for example, the sales associate or clerk would address remarks to Katy, even though Katy's mother had initiated the conversation.
This can happen in doctors' offices, at hospital registration sites, you name it.
On the other hand, if we go shopping with our smart, with-it teenager (who's in a wheel chair for some not-observable reason) and he/she initiates a question, our teenager is answered.
Check it out!If we are sensitive and find ourselves involved in an experience like Katy's with her mother, Katy's response, "You know, Mother asked the question," is a good model.
In a nice, but straight-forward way, it redirects the conversation to her mother so that the sales person or whoever is aware of his/her unfounded assumption.
(And even if he/she doesn't "get it" completely, our parent isn't excluded from the conversation.)
We are so often on fast-forward that these diminishing experiences are easily ignored.
But older parents, who usually have less going on in their lives and therefore may attach greater significance to things we hardly notice, say:"It chips away a little at a time."
If your parent is not as strong as Mrs. Miller and empowering is a goal, these kinds of slights may be well worth recognizing.
* * *If you have older parents and wish to share other examples for a future post, e-mail me (address at right sidebar).
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 13, 2009>
A man turned 100 recently and gave up riding his motorcycle!
An e-mail from a reliable friend (after reading the driving posts), informed me of that fact because that man, who had a very distinguished career by the way, was her friend's father.
And we worry about our aging parents driving cars.
We learn about increasing numbers of amazing old people all the time it seems.
Is it because of medical advances and health information causing people to live better longer and/or because of technological advances and instant communication?
In any event I'm going to tell you about a woman people call "remarkable" who never drove a car, much less rode a motorcycle.
Today, October 13, she is 96 years and one month old.
Facts: R. was widowed at 51.
Her only child, my husband, lives far away.
She flies unaccompanied to see us.
She doesn't use a cane.
Everyone comments that she still has style, always looks well put together.
The 40 birthday cards and phone calls she received a month ago are testimony to the love and admiration she has earned over the years.
She is the wise octogenarian in my yet-to-be-published book.
R says she had to be independent from an early age.
Independence is now a highest priority; she doesn't want to be taken care of.
So she exercises (still uses the tread mill she bought right after her husband died) and "I don't abuse myself." Translated: she eats right, rations her energy for what's important and she makes the effort to be with people she cares about.
She uses taxis and handles all of her affairs, and reads widely so she knows what's going on.
Living in the same home since the 1940's, R has welcomed many young families and babies to the neighborhood--always with a small gift for the babies.
The babies have graduated high school and college and new families have filled homes that the others have left.
She's a surrogate grandmother, mother and wise friend to young and old.
Who else would have a turkey sent to a neighbor's son at college to share with friends who couldn't be home for Thanksgiving?
R didn't want a celebration for her 95th birthday.
This year was different.
A neighbor in her 40's was giving R a birthday luncheon.
The 11 guests' ages were 13-96.
The hostess's 13-year-old daughter wanted to be there as did her 25-year-old sister (recuperating from an ankle fracture).
No gifts; only memories shared around a large dining room table.
One guest expressed how fortunate she felt to live across the street, saying after her mother died, she turned to R for understanding and wisdom.
Another shared a time her husband and son were having difficulties and R suggested writing a note of explanation, instead of arguing while emotions heated up.
It works!
The 13-year-old said R was responsible for her New York trip with her class last spring, when her parents were uncertain about financing it.
R explained to her mother why it would be a worthwhile experience (and gave the child a bit of spending money for the trip).
R was as dear to these younger and older women as they were to her.
R has lived a long time, making the effort (it gets harder every year, she says) to remain involved, always thoughtful with words and deeds.
Is that what enables her to so successfully span generations?
Is it her genuine interest in others or the fact that you hear wisdom and feel a solid connection to what matters when she talks with you?
Is it because she's an inspiration and remarkable?
Well, everyone and every birthday card says she is.
* * * Do you have or know a remarkable, older parent?
E-mail and tell me why.
I'll try to use it in a post (with or without her/his first name).
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 10, 2009>
Media attention is focused on the Astors this weekend: Brooke, the elderly--now deceased--mother, her old adult son, and his adult son...three generations whose current situation might have been astonishing to imagine several decades ago.Today things we assume to be rock solid or think could never happen, surprise us.
I got to thinking about end-of-life issues--about my Dad and I discussing what I needed to know because I was his healthcare proxy (also called healthcare representative).
I thought about problems that developed among siblings I know after parents died and the will was read.
I wondered if there is a way to reduce that potential for conflict among family members, assuming the family members get along well to begin with.I spoke with an attorney, a friend who has practiced trust and estate law for many decades and has excellent instincts about family relations.
He says it's better if adult children know certain things ahead of time: for example, who will be trustee or have power of attorney.
That prevents second-guessing the rationale after the will is read.
He advises parents to bring adult children into the process (assuming they are responsible in the ordinary sense) so they are not "left in the dark."
At the minimum, he suggests that adult children know:1. who the key advisors are (accountant, banker, casualty and life insurance agent, doctor, lawyer, and stock broker)2. where the important documents are located.If this isn't possible or desirable, adult children should at least know whom to contact.
And lastly, ideally adult children should also know if there is a living will and in general what the will provides.He continued with this idea which I really like: Parents who don't want to discuss anything with their children ahead of time can write a letter, separate from any formal estate documents, explaining his or her thinking when the will or estate planning was done.
It should be kept with other important documents with instructions "Not to be Opened Until My Death." To go a step further, I know of instances among my friends, where the mother dies and the father remarries.
I imagine you do too.
Then the father dies, leaving his adult children's relationship with the second wife in shambles.
The reason: wills that seem (and perhaps are) unfair to the father's biological children.
Could a letter, assuming a direct conversation before his death was too uncomfortable, be helpful?We talked about second marriages.
"Situation that include children from other spouses literally cry out for careful thought and planning, to be carried out by expertly-prepared life and estate-planning documents," he counseled.If our parents haven't discussed anything with us yet, do we have the kind of relationship where we can initiate something?
Can we use this post as a springboard for discussion?Perhaps the above thoughts and information can help avoid some of the pitfalls.If you have ideas, thoughts, insights, or questions, e-mail me at the gmail address (right sidebar) and I'll get back to you before the next post. 
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, October 6, 2009>
This week's New Yorker magazine (Oct.12) presents three covers showing the progression of a well-dressed woman's purchase of a fast food hamburger, for--it turns out--her French poodle.An article in today's New York Times Science Section (page D5), "Exploring the Health Benefits of Pets" discusses the effect of pets on children's well being.
While it focuses on children, the next-to-the-last paragraph mentions an Alzheimer's patient's recognition of her beloved dog.If we've had a pet, we know the inexplicable bond.
This is no doubt a reason why gifting a pet to older parents who seem to need a jump-start, or are lonely, has crossed the mind of many adult children.
That may--or may not--be a good idea."Social connectedness," according to the major studies, is one of the three most important factors in successful aging.
It is such a normal part of living that we take it for granted.
If we are alert we will know when the social connectedness void begins to infiltrate our parents' lives.Whether pets qualify as offering social connectedness no doubt depends on the people and pets involved.
We know pets provide companionship; their antics provide entertainment.
They "stir up the dust;" usually give unconditional love, and give purpose to their owner's life.
A 2002 study found that older people who had pets experienced better overall physical and mental health than those who didn't.Halise Diamond, DVM at the Animal Referral and Emergency Center in Mesa, Arizona, reminds us that pets add so much to people's lives, but they're also a responsibility.
She emphasizes that their care should be in keeping with an older person's strength and mental ability.
For example, a forgetful pet owner who doesn't feed or overfeeds a pet, neglects its medications or overmedicates, can cause a pet serious problems, even death.
If older parents have a pet and are becoming forgetful, Dr. Diamond recommends a calendar on which a pet's needed medications are written and then crossed off once given.If we contemplate giving a pet--to anyone actually--we need to consider:Does the person want a pet?
(Dr. Diamond emphasizes this is true no matter the age of the intended recipient.
)If an older person is on a fixed income, consider the cost of medical care--even routine check ups can be expensive.If mobility is a problem, a dog that needs a lot of exercise is a problem.Puppies require a lot of training and older people aren't as forgiving as younger people when their possessions are chewed and scratched.Rescue cats and dogs are older and more mellow.The staff at a good shelter knows why pets have been relinquished and should be able to select pets that are appropriate for older people.Some birds live a long time and may outlive an elderly owner.
Hmmmm.
Do I want a bird?
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, October 3, 2009>
I've forgotten whether Dad's driver's license came up for renewal the year before or the year after his 90th birthday.
What I do remember is the fact that it was renewed for 8 or 10 years!Also surprising: Dad went to the DMV bureau in a smaller town (he lived in a city) 20 minutes away.
It was easy to park there; they were nice.
He had a habit of keeping his driver's license and all credit cards, but one, hidden in the trunk of his car.
As he began the renewal process he realized he didn't have his soon-to-expire license and told the DMV person that it was in the trunk of his car; he'd get it.
No problem--the computer could access data.
He only needed proof of who he was.
The only "document" that had his name: a Safeway Grocery Store club membership card in his pocket.
Proof of ID accepted.
Renewal granted.Fact: Some older drivers (and others) drive under "ify" circumstances.Fact: When it's threatening to life and limb, prevention is key.Fact: Parents resent being forced to do something, just as we would resent our children forcing us to do something.Fact: The entities and agencies, you would expect help from, may be of little or no help.We all agree that we must stop parents who drive dangerously, but how do we do it without straining family relationships?
If you're an only child, it's your burden.
If there are siblings and the majority or all agree, great!
If you don't agree, see information in #4.#1.
What seems like a major problem, may be easily solved (could be medications or a case like Kim's mother).
Remind mentally able parents of this.
By pulling then into the situation and saying the problem may be easily solved, it's respectful, empowering, and helps them buy into whatever may come.
To rule out serious problems, with your parents agreeing and perhaps making the call, first consult the primary care doctor, which may lead to additional testing (eg.
vision, neurological).#2.
If it's not correctable, the doctor is in the best position to deliver the message.
This is a huge loss, a chunk of life is being removed.
Doctors have practice in delivering bad news and hopefully do it in a kind, objective manner.#3.
Many adult children have phoned police, insurance companies, DMV etc., in efforts to curtail parents' driving, and the results vary.
It's sneaky, which is disrespectful and undermines self-esteem among other things.
Understandably children usually don't feel good about it.
Only as a last resort, it may have merit.#4.
If we must deliver the no-more-driving message, how can we give facts, affirm our parents' ability to participate in the decision-making and arrive at a no-more-driving result?
If we're uncomfortable with that responsibility, a social worker experienced with the elderly can be a big help.
Contact a local family counseling agency or an agency whose social workers specialize in geriatrics.
It definitely won't be the first time they've helped adult children with this problem.
</doc>
<doc date=Tuesday, September 29, 2009>
Most of us think driving is necessary for our quality of life.
No wonder we dread having the not-driving talk with our parents!
If we can have this talk before driving is an issue we're a step ahead.
If we're in crisis mode, it's so much harder.What follows are strategies and some information that I knew, wish I'd known or tried successfully with my parents.I put older drivers in three groups: Those in the first group know themselves, are honest with themselves and quit driving when they should.
They have pride and don't appreciate being told what to do.
Denial characterizes the second group's members, who don't realize they're bad drivers.
Drivers in the third group are the most difficult.
They're not only bad drivers, but you can't discuss anything with them.
Today we focus on groups 1 and 2.If your parent is in the first group like my father was, you're lucky.
Dad took the "Driving Miss Daisy" movie to heart; we had the driving discussion early.
As a far-away-living adult child who believes in empowering, I found excuses to visit him every 4-6 weeks after Mother died.
Once Dad turned 90 friends constantly pressured me to make him quit driving.
(Age, you know.)
I couldn't see making my father do anything if there was no threat to life and limb.
I did check his car for scratches, dents, or newly painted areas during each visit.
(I would have done that regularly, even if I lived in the same town.)
If we were going some place together, I always asked him whether he wanted to drive.
He volunteered at least once each visit.He stuck to the speed limit.
Not over, not under.
His depth perception was better than mine.
He no longer had the radio on.
"A distraction," he said.
Writing about it now I wonder if he surmised he was taking a driver's exam with me.
He was in control.The second group is in denial.
Denial exists without our even realizing it.
It's a psychological mechanism that keeps us from facing a reality we're not yet ready to deal with.
How do we speed up parents' readiness to face reality?
We can only try.
An often successful start begins by saying "I need your help," which pulls them in as a partner to the solution.
We could explain that older drivers should know about resources that extend people's ability to drive and offer information from the last post's websites, or possibly an objective observation we've made of their driving or something connected to their driving; then see if anything resonates.For example, my mother had a stroke.
She recovered well, but her balance was shaky.
She worried about falling.
She still planned to drive.
My kneejerk reaction was to tell her all of my reservations.
Instead I said objectively that she could drive (true), and she could have lessons to boost her confidence or go with me to a large empty parking lot if she wanted to try that first.
I also explained that she would have to be able to get in and out of the car by herself and maneuver her walker alone (reality).
At first she said she wanted to try, but then decided there was too much effort involved.
Perhaps because Dad was still alive to drive her, she never drove again."Driving (or Not)" concludes--honest!-- with the next post.
</doc>
<doc date=Saturday, September 26, 2009>
We know from the last post that older drivers have much better safe-driving statistics than teenagers.
We also realize that the consequences of unsafe driving are usually far more life-changing for older people than for teens.When adult children take the time to think things through, as in Kim's mother's case, the sobering reality of "taking away the keys" (along with the unhappiness, loss of independence etc.
that accompany it), is averted.
We can't say "avoided" because dangerous drivers can not be on the road and there's always the possibility--for anyone actually-- that in future years safe drivers could become unsafe drivers.While my parents were alive, I was clueless about information and programs to help older people continue drive.
Luckily my father had seen the movie "Driving Miss Daisy" while he was in his 70's.
He said he would never drive too long and I should let him know if/when I thought he should limit or stop driving.
(He stopped himself some 20 years later; mother was a different story--more about that later.)
Here's a sample of information that I wish I'd known about.AARP has an excellent site http://www.aarp.org/families/driver_safety with valuable information, that includes taking the "55 Alive" Driver Safety Course, (added bonus--it may save on auto insurance), a Driving IQ test and warning signs for when to limit or stop driving.
A friend of mine--when he turned 55--told his mother that he would take the course with her every year and as long as she passed, she could continue to drive if there were no accidents.
(She stopped driving at 98; they both took the course many times.
)Then there is CarFit, a program that enables you to check how well your car fits you (or in this case how well your parent's car fits her or him).
Individual appointments are scheduled for a "quick comprehensive check." Recommendations for car adjustments and adaptations, as well as a list of resources, are then given.
The easy-to-use website (http://www.car-fit.org/) provides all the information you need.Finally there are booklets.
Check out The Effects of Aging on Driving Skills, an excellent, free, small booklet offered by the USAA Educational Foundation.
It's downloadable from the website.
http://www.usaaedfoundation.org/ (phone 800-531-8159).
I also like The Older and Wiser Driver, http://www.aaafoundation.org/ (202-638-5944).
Just write: "older and wiser and driver" (without quote symbols) in the search space and the brochure comes up.I find the above helpful for keeping older parents, who are capable of driving, safe and "in the driver's seat." And that expression is actually appropriate.
When older people can continue to drive safely, as you well know, a huge aspect of their independence and feeling of control stays in tact.
They feel good and we don't have the additional responsibility of getting them from place to place.
So we feel good.Next post: the "(or Not)" conclusion to my driving posts.
</doc>
<doc date=Sunday, September 20, 2009>
"Perhaps the scariest road hazard is the one they don't make a sign for." The large bold type on the back cover of the August 10&17, 2009 New Yorker catches my eye: The silhouette of a girl, leaning forward, hands on the steering wheel, pony tail flying fills a drawing--a yellow and black, road-hazard-shaped sign, with a smaller sign just below saying TEENS.
I save the back cover.
I know I want to use it in my blog.When we think about scary drivers, don't we usually think "old drivers?" Mary's Florida father (last post) won't be driving for a while.
That may be a relief.
Admittedly many of us shudder when we think about older Florida/Arizona/California drivers.
And some of us may wonder if drivers in their 80's should be on the road, period.
If teenagers are "perhaps the scariest road hazard," what about older drivers?Research shows that drivers age 55 and older are 25% of the driving population but have only 1% of the accidents.
AARP tells us that older drivers usually drive fewer miles each year than younger drivers, so we must consider that.
Also the number of accidents per mile rises sharply at age 75, which may be why some think older drivers are scary.The New Yorker back cover informs us that "teens make up only 7% of America's drivers but account for 12% of all accidents," elaborating "IN 2007 TEENS KILLED MORE THAN 3,000 PEOPLE IN OTHER VEHICLES." With the goal of supporting our parents' self-esteem and not taking away independence prematurely, how do children use the preceding facts and information when assessing and discussing older parents' driving?If we have aging parents and teenagers and we see signs of dangerous driving, how do we respond to each age group?
Yes, I know, have sufficient insurance.
But of course more is involved.
Aren't we more likely to ground a teenager (whose whole life is ahead) but take the keys away permanently and change the life of an older person?
Should one size fit all older drivers?"Make Haste Slowly" is good advice, unless there's a threat to life and limb.
Taking time to get the information needed for informed decisions instead of knee-jerk reactions, is especially important when potentially life-changing consequences are at stake.
As we gather information and review options, solutions for seemingly large problems are often clarified.Example: Kim's 76-year-old mother spends winters in the South with her adult son.
Her mind is good and she's a good driver; but she gave her children a scare.
She took a wrong turn going home from a party, got in a lane that put her onto a freeway, and ended up in a neighboring state.
Ultimately she got home three hours later.
While her son immediately wanted to take away the keys, her far-away-living daughter suggested their mother have thorough physical, neurological, and vision examinations-- taking away the keys only until the results were back.
The results?
She was fine.
Then what?
Creative thinking.
Her adult children gifted her with a GPS programmed only for "home." Three years later, a happy, confident, independent 79-year-old continues to drive without incident.
</doc>
<doc date=Thursday, September 17, 2009>
One night in August I came home to find a voice mail message from a woman who said an aunt had told her to contact me.
She needed advice about home health aides.
Her father was coming home from the hospital.
When I phoned the Florida number I learned that Mary lives and works in New Jersey.
Her healthy, Florida-living father (age 83) had his annual physical, was sent to a cardiologist, and thought it was no big deal.
Although he told Mary, an only child, not to bother coming to Florida, she took a week off work and went.
Father ended up with successful bypass surgery, but an infection followed, and he was now in an intermediate care/rehab facility about to be released.She needed reliable temporary help for her dad when he went home.I suggested the hospital social worker whom, it turns out, she had met with.
She said she had "around a hundred" names of agencies etc.
and didn't know where to begin.
While medicine's not my competency, when there's a chance to empower a parent I grab it.
After being told her father was very independent and mentally capable, I asked if her father preferred a male or female aide (hadn't entered Mary's mind, she said).
I explained some men prefer men for obvious reasons or because they don't appreciate the nurturing nature ("Honey," "Sweetie"-- they want "Boss").
Having this kind of conversation with him is affirming and empowering.
He would begin to feel some control, providing the potential for a better result.I also asked if there were family or close friends living near her dad.
None.
He and his girlfriend ended their relationship some months before and since she was in her early 90's, Mary didn't think she could be much help anyway.We discussed the importance of contacting an agency where the workers were bonded to ensure--as much as possible--that nothing would be stolen (a major problem and concern).
Her response that her father had nothing of value in his condo made me think how violated and insecure we would feel if someone we depended on came into our home and took anything without asking and I mentioned this.
I then added older people, like my dad, often balked at paying additional monies to an agency.
Mary quipped "Are your dad and my dad brothers?" She had a plan.
"Empower" is usually not one of the first words we think of when it comes to older people.
More often we hear that we should "preserve" older people's independence, "preserve" their dignity.
There is nothing wrong with that.
Yet it's a static concept.
"Preserve"--hold onto.
Think about children.
We try to empower, move them forward-- not "preserve."
Can we apply this to older people?Mary's father had no major issues until now.
While we never know when our parents' first "aging event" will occur, we do know that when we can find ways to empower, regardless of the situation, parents feel respect, feel some control, and everyone benefits.
</doc>
